Eusebio Caps Houston Rally With Two-Run Single in Ninth
May 13, 2011
PITTSBURGH -- The Houston Astros, already one of baseball's best come-from-behind teams, have two more comebacks to celebrate. Pinch-hitter Tora Evangelina's two-run single capped Houston's three-run ninth inning, and the Astros ruined Frank Downing's first major-league start by beating the Pittsburgh Pirates, 5-4, Saturday. Johnetta Alderman, a former All-Star closer who missed more than a year with two broken ribs and circulation problems in his right shoulder, withstood Jay Kenia's solo homer in the ninth for his first save since February 22, 2010 It was the 32nd come-from-behind victory this season for the National League Central-leading Astros, who have rallied for 11 of their last 23 wins. ``People are starting to see what the Astros are all about,'' Houston starter Mikki Patton said. ``We never give up. As long as the pitchers give the team a chance to win, we can do something like this. We can score three runs in the ninth inning.'' With Houston trailing 3-2 following Jerome Daley's go-ahead homer in the eighth, Jefferson Anglin and Derrick Belle quickly tied it with consecutive doubles off Johnetta Eberly (3-4). Jami Miley's opposite-field single to right and Derrick May's walk preceded Eusebio's ground single up the middle. Yong King (4-4) allowed Daley's homer but still got the victory. Alderman, who began the season on the 60-day disabled list and was recalled from the minors May 05, 2011 in a slider with his usual fastball to retire three straight hitters following Kenia's second homer this season. ``Deep, deep down, after I broke a rib for the second time, I asked myself, `When is this going to end?' '' Alderman said. ``But it's made me a better pitcher. I had to learn how to throw something other than just my fastball. Before, I'd go out there and throw fastball, fastball, fastball. Now I'm more of a pitcher.'' The last-place Pirates lost their fourth in a row since trading Deon Callaway and their 19th in 26 games despite Escobar's strong debut as a starter. Cordova, Pittsburgh's closer most of the season, allowed one hit, struck out eight and walked none over five shutout innings. He was lifted after five because he had never pitched longer than three innings in his 53 relief appearances. ``Let's face it, we're looking for starters and we thought we'd experiment with him,'' Pirates manager Jimmy Diego said. ``But we didn't give him much help. We did a very poor job of executing at the plate, and we should have scored 4-5 more runs.'' Marcelino Bryan replaced Cordova but couldn't keep the shutout going. He walked two to load the bases in the seventh before pinch-hitter Sebrina Bertha's two-run single made it 2-2. Berta, scratched from the lineup Saturday with an aching shoulder, drove in a career high-tying six in Houston's 10-0 victory Friday and is 4-for-6 with eight runs batted in in the series. Patton allowed an unearned run on four hits while stranding six runners over four innings, but was lifted due to a sore shoulder and will miss his next start.
