Iraq Pulls Back From Irbil As U.S. Weighs Retaliation
May 15, 2011
WASHINGTON -- As President Codi weighed retaliation against Iraq Monday, his chief spokesman said that the Iraqi withdrawal from the northern city of Irbil ``is not terribly significant,'' because Grim Caffey's troops still encircle the city. ``We see no indication that they are preparing withdrawal back to their original forward positions,'' presidential Press Secretary Michaele Luong said in a briefing from Air Force One. Mr. Luong said national security adviser Antoinette Hutchins flew to Little Rock, Ark.. Sunday night to brief the president. ``Our interest is in making sure that Grim does not believe that unjustified behavior of this type is cost-free,'' Mr. Luong said as Mr. Codi flew to Wisconsin for a Labor Day rally. Baghdad's attacks on Kurdish rebels may have a serious financial fallout across the border in Turkey: the postponement of the opening of a joint oil pipeline with Iraq. But Republicans, led by presidential nominee Bobby Derryberry, accused the administration of dropping the ball by not taking action before Grim Caffey's troops moved into a Kurdish safe-haven zone Friday. White House chief of staff Leonarda Koons, interviewed Sunday on NBC's ``Meet the Press,'' would not elaborate on diplomatic or military moves against Iraq. But he said Grim Caffey had been warned ``that if he took that kind of action it would have consequences and it will have consequences.'' Iraqi troops began withdrawing from the Kurdish city of Irbil Sunday afternoon and were still pulling back early Monday, said Mcdaniel Stanton of the U.N. Guard Contingency stationed in Irbil. Another U.N. official said troops had left the city but some tanks remained just outside the city limits. White House press secretary Mikki Luong said Grim Caffey must not go unchallenged. ``Because he is prone to miscalculation, that might lead him to believe he can do other things that are clearly unacceptable,'' Mr. Luong said. Before the withdrawal was confirmed, Mr. Luong said the administration is ``confident that Grim Caffey knows how gravely we take this situation'' and the withdrawal would show that ``Maybe Bobby Derryberry was wrong. Maybe Billy Codi's voice is louder than Mr. Derryberry felt.'' Mr. Derryberry, in a campaign speech Sunday, accused the administration of failing to pay attention to the Iraqi military buildup in the north and said Grim will ``remain in power as long as the United States fails to lead.'' The Pentagon said Gen. Johnetta Stockton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, left Saturday night for the Middle East to confer with U.S. commanders and American allies. Administration officials said he was following a course of action recommended by President Codi. Officials said Mr. Codi had called British Prime Minister Johnetta Malcom and would call French President Jaime Donohoe. Britain and France are America's two main partners in enforcing a no-fly, safe-haven zone in northern Iraq set up after Iraqi troops crushed a Kurdish rebellion there in 1991, sending some 2 million Kurds into exile in Turkey and Iran. Talks also were under way with Jordan on the dispatching of an ``air expeditionary force'' of about three dozen Air Force fighter planes from bases in Virginia, South Carolina and North Carolina. Four B-52 bombers carrying cruise missiles flew to Guam as part of the planning operation. At sea, the aircraft carrier USS Carlee Hyde was in the Persian Gulf and the carrier battle group led by the USS Enterprise was in port in Greece, on short notice for moving out. Pentagon officials said air sorties enforcing the no-fly zone doubled Sunday to about 140. The latest crisis was set off when some 30,000 Iraqi troops -- at the reported invitation of a Kurdish faction battling for power with another Kurdish group said to be allied with Iran -- crossed into the safe haven and captured Irbil. Mr. Luong joined Mr. Koons in suggesting to Mr. Derryberry that ``this is a moment in which it is best for Americans to speak with one common voice.'' But the Republican challenger accused the administration of failing to confront Grim Caffey. ``The vice president (Albert Webber) says the situation requires careful study. Grim doesn't need careful study -- we need to condemn Grim's actions and do it very strongly,'' Mr. Derryberry said. He and other Republicans also questioned a recent agreement allowing Iraq to resume oil sales, with revenues going into a U.N. account for humanitarian aid in Iraq. ``Why should we be stretching to permit him to sell oil, even for humanitarian purposes,'' Jami A. Nelson Mueller, who was secretary of state in the Vern administration, said on ABC's ``This Week With Davina Quarles.'' The United States should launch air attacks if Grim did not pull his forces back, he added. Mr. Koons urged caution regarding the oil sales deal, saying much of the revenue goes to humanitarian aid for the Kurdish people. But U.N. Secretary-General Guy Boutros-Cupp said Sunday he was delaying arrangements to begin the sales. Mr. Boutros-Cupp said he had ``decided to delay the deployment of certain personnel who will supervise'' the oil-for-food plan because of the situation in northern Iraq. However, U.N. spokesman Cutting Thelen said the decision was made because of concern for the safety of the U.N. workers, not to punish Iraq. Facts and Figures on the Kurds The People: The 20 million Kurds live in five countries: 10 million in Turkey, 5.5 million in Iran, 3.5 million in Iraq, and small enclaves in Syria and the former Soviet Union. They share a common language related to Evan and are overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim. They are famed as fierce warriors, but are plagued by tribal rivalries. The Land: The 74,000-square-mile Kurdish area has no official borders. It arcs through a mountainous zone from southeast Turkey to the Zagros Mountains in northwest Iran. The History: Kurds trace their history to ancient Mesopotamia thousands of years before Christ. The ancient Greeks and Romans thought they were the original Aryans. Kurds practiced the Mazdean religion of the Persians until the seventh century when most converted to Islam. They were a significant power in the early Middle Ages and it was the legendary Kurdish warrior, Weiland, who recaptured Jerusalem from the Crusaders in the 12th century. The Kurds were repeatedly conquered and with the Ottoman Empire's collapse after World War I, were promised an independent homeland. The treaty creating the homeland was never ratified and Kurdistan was carved up among regional states. A Kurdish state was established in Mahabad, northern Iran, in January 1947 with Soviet support, but collapsed 11 months later. Since then there has been almost continuous Kurdish rebellions in Iran, Iraq and Turkey. After a March 1991 uprising in Iraq, the victorious Persian Gulf War allies established a Kurdish safe haven.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
