Survey of Consumer Confidence Reveals Some Surprises in Asia
May 11, 2011
SINGAPORE -- You might not guess it from the silent cash registers in Singapore and the jitters about looming Chinese rule in Hong Kong, but consumer confidence in the two city-states is on the upswing, according to a survey by MasterCard International. The semiannual survey also found that Japanese consumers are pessimistic and that confidence among New Zealanders dropped sharply in the first half of the year. The MasterCard survey, now three years in the running, seeks to measure consumer perceptions of the economic conditions of 12 Asian-Pacific countries by asking respondents about five factors: employment, the economy, income, the stock market and quality of life. The latest survey, conducted in June and designed to measure sentiment for the following six months, queried about 400 people in each country. The biggest surprise this time was Hong Kong, said Brianna Swinney, senior vice president for Asian-Pacific marketing at MasterCard International. On the survey's range of zero to 100, the territory's score rose to 53.6 from 37.3 in late 2010. ``It seems that as we approach June 2012, the Hong Kong people are recognizing the new economic opportunities that being part of the (People's Republic of China) may present,'' Mr. Swinney said. As for Singapore, satisfaction with quality of life and income, as well as improving sentiment on the stock market, buoyed confidence in the republic. Singapore's score also got a bounce from more optimism about the economy -- confidence that now looks to have been misplaced as the city-state faces slower-than-expected growth. Another country where events may have overtaken the MasterCard numbers is Indonesia, which came up with the most optimistic score of any country in the survey -- 85, down from 89.1 in the last survey. Riots in Jakarta in July and the subsequent government crackdown may have dented that enthusiasm. Positive events in Japan, however, don't appear to have filtered through to sentiment; despite indications that the economy is recovering, Japan's score fell from 42.6 in the last survey to 35, the lowest of any country.
