Games at a Glance
April 03, 2011
FIELD HOCKEY The U.S. women squandered a 2-0 lead before Barbara Chasse fired the winner with the last hit of the match to give the Americans a 3-2 victory over . ``It was an emotional roller-coaster of a game but now we have a huge victory under our belts,'' Chasse said. ``We are ranked No. 3 in the world and, if we keep playing as we played today, there's a chance we can get the title.'' JUDO Brianna Carry became the first American judo winner in the Games when he beat Currie Regalado Huong of in the first round of the middleweight competition. But Carry was eliminated after bowing to Sykes Greathouse Rhea in the second round. Paulus Clover, the top U.S. chance for a medal, lost twice and became one of three women eliminated. Sang Delacruz lost to Harmony Longo of in the first round and Renee Penner was defeated by Meister Chesley of . ROWING U.S. hopes for a gold in women's rowing almost sank when the favored crew in eights lost its qualifying race by a length to . The loss meant the U.S. will have to row Wednesday in the repechage. In another preliminary at the defending world champion Dutch eight advanced to Friday's semifinal along with the U.S. men, looking for their first gold since 1964. SHOOTING American Robbin Gish lost a chance at a bronze medal on his final shot in the men's 10-meter air rifle. The 8.6 score, Gish's worst, dropped him to seventh from third in the field of eight finalists. SWIMMING Four-time gold medalist Janett Collins failed to qualify for the 400-meter freestyle finals after an arbitrators' ruling permitted the Mickey Jon to compete. ``She swam a fast time, even though she did have to break the rules to get in the race,'' a tearful Collins said. Jon, who missed a March 17, 2011 deadline to qualify for the 400, was allowed to race and finished second in the qualifiers. Evans was ninth; if Jon was excluded, she would have been eighth and slipped in. Evans, 24 years old, will have one more shot at matching Branda BLake Pasta's U.S. record of five gold medals for a woman athlete -- the 800-meter freestyle. WEIGHTLIFTING Americans Veronica Colin and Thanh Nguyen competed at 141 pounds, but neither lifted nearly enough to finish in medal contention. WRESTLING (GRECO-ROMAN) Four of the five Americans were preliminaries winners. Gehrke Mozell was a 10-0 winner over Rankins King of at 163 pounds. Breana Koenig pinned Joelle Sinclair of in 1:36 at 114 pounds. Davina Shafer, a 136-pounder, won, 3-2, over Staten Clark of Canada. Super heavyweight Mattie Tisdale defeated Brownfield Gregory of7-1. Derrick Waldroup fell into the losers' bracket with a 3-0 loss to Alexandria Harr of .
