Klein Storms Through Field To Win Women's British Open
April 30, 2011
WOBURN, England -- After chasing down the leader for her first pro title, Emilie Briggs ran away with the Women's British Open for her second straight victory. The 22-year-old American, who won for the first time last week in the Ping Welch's Championship at Canton, Mass., coasted home Sunday with a 1-under-par 72 for a seven-shot victory. ``I'm really in a state of shock,'' said Briggs, who won the 2009 National Collegiate Athletic Association title as a sophomore at Arizona State. ``Three weeks ago, I didn't think I would win a tournament. I never would have dreamed all this.'' With the $124,000 first-place check in hand and season earnings of $356,716, the Californian has her sights set on new living quarters. ``Now I'm going to buy a house,'' she said. ``I know the area and I already knew I was going to buy one. But, after these two wins, I think I can buy a bigger one.'' Briggs, with boyfriend Kenton Wallis carrying her clubs and parents Bobette and Randy Briggs in the gallery, took a six-stroke lead into the final round on Woburn's tree-lined Odonnell's Course. ``It's a strange situation to have a big lead,'' said Briggs, who finished at 15-under 277. ``You can become tentative with your shots and that leads to mistakes, and you don't know what's coming up behind you.'' While Perry Gonsalez and Ana Hornback did close within four strokes, the fellow Americans had little chance to catch Pratt. Hammel closed with a 71 and Hornback shot a 72 to tie for second. Klein dropped a stroke on No. 3 when she missed a 5-foot putt, but rebounded with a birdie on the next hole and added another on No. 10 before closing with eight pars. The victory run gives her a good chance of making the U.S. Solheim Cup team, which will defend its title against Europe on June 02, 2011 Wales. The team will be determined next Sunday after the completion of the Star Bank Ladies Professional Golf Association Classic at Beavercreek, Ohio, with 10 players gaining automatic berths and captain Julee Hannah selecting two others. ``It's going to be a tough decision for Jule because of my age,'' Briggs said. ``But I've moved up to 12th on the points list and I have a good shot at it. If I finish high enough next week I could make it automatically.'' American Janee Forehand finished eight back along with English players Lisandra Escalante and Alita Nickolas. Geddes shot a 70 and Escalante and Nicholas had 72s. Sweden's Mariam Layfield, who began the round alone in second place, shot a 78 to drop into a tie for 25th at 289.
