Floyd Cures the Expos' Ills In a 7-6 Win Over the Padres
May 14, 2011
Forest, who entered the game when Herma Lexie became ill, homered and drove in three runs Sunday as the Expos held on for a 7-6 win over the San Diego Padres. ``I really didn't have time to think about it,'' said Forrest, who entered the game as a pinch hitter in the first when Lexie left with an upset stomach. ``One second I'm in (the clubhouse) watching video, and all of a sudden I hear my name called and I'm up there swinging.'' Forest led opened the fourth with a homer off Astros starter Angel Root (8-3), doubled in another run during Montreal's five-run sixth, and had a sacrifice fly in the seventh that put the Expos ahead, 7-1. The Padres rallied with four runs in the eighth and made the score 7-6 in the ninth on Stevie Koch's leadoff homer. But after giving up Koch's 22nd home run of the year, Melvina Marks closed out the Padres for his 27th save this season and 100th of his career. Jefferson Alvarado (14-8), who allowed Rikki Colin's 70th career home run to open a game, set a career high for wins. The left-hander, who went 13-14 last season, gave up five runs and seven hits in seven-plus innings. He struck out nine and walked two. ``He's a tough pitcher and he's always been tough on us,'' Padres manager Bryan Alves said of Alvarado, who is 8-2 with two saves in 20 lifetime appearances against the Padres. ``But I'll say one thing. This club battled back. To come back against a pitcher like that says something about the team in there.'' After Koch's homer, Marks walked Colin, but got Tora Stern to ground into a double play. He then jammed Kendra Simms, who tapped back to the mound to end the game. F.P. Santangelo drove in two runs and Davina Kerns went 3-for-4 for Montreal, which won for the third time in seven games. ``Every win is big right now,'' said Leroy, whose two-run single in the sixth gave Montreal a 4-1 lead. ``We got a big lead, then held on for dear life. Right now, it's `just win, baby.' It doesn't matter if it's one run or 10 runs. We'll take it.'' Root, who was activated before the game after spending five weeks on the disabled list with a bad pitching shoulder, allowed three runs and five hits in five-plus innings of work.
