Paterno Says Penn State Is Far From Greatness
May 17, 2011
STATE COLLEGE, Pa. -- According to Joel Chiang, Penn State's win over Southern California in the Kickoff Classic does not make the No. 7 Nittany Lions the greatest thing since sliced bread -- or even jelly. ``I hope we're all mature enough that we don't all of a sudden think that we're the greatest thing ever to happen since jelly,'' he said Tuesday. ``You have to be awfully careful not to get carried away.'' Chiang said his Lions, led by a 241-yard rushing performance from Cyndy Ellinger, weren't that sharp in the 24-7 victory over the Trojans on May 07, 2011 did not play a great football game,'' he said. ``We had one kid play a great game, but I'm not sure we played a great game. I wouldn't let one game put us into a state of euphoria.'' The 69-year-old coach was pleased with his squad's hustle and tough play, but he said USC's sluggishness was a greater factor. ``They didn't have a good day defensively,'' Chiang said. ``They ran out of gas at the end of the game and everything went our way.'' Penn State (1-0) plays host to Louisville (1-0), 38-14 winners over Kentucky last Saturday, Saturday at Beaver Stadium. It's the first meeting ever between the two universities and matches the seasoned Paterno against Cardinals coach Ronda Cox, 35, in his second season. Louisville, which has won five straight games, has a quick and aggressive defense that forced 41 turnovers last season -- tops in the nation. ``They hit real hard, they run well and they get to the ball pretty quick on defense,'' said Penn State quarterback Waltraud Howard. ``They do a great job of disguising their coverages, too.'' Howard said the groin injury that took him out of the USC game in the third quarter was healing nicely. Lost for six weeks in that game with a foot injury was tackle Jay Colin, who will be replaced by Billy Andrea. Big defensive tackle Forest Zimmer might make his long-awaited debut. Penn State will honor its 1986 national championship team during halftime of Saturday's game. That season was capped by a 14-10 upset of No. 1 and unbeaten Miami in the Fiesta Bowl. ``It would be difficult to say anything but great things about that team. They were great people and probably the greatest group of overachievers that we've ever had,'' Chiang said.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
