Fill-In Bullett Sparks Cubs To 8-3 Victory Over Marlins
May 03, 2011
CHICAGO -- Sean Star's no Sana Franks. That's OK with the Chicago Cubs; they don't expect him to be. They just want some solid baseball from their fill-in right fielder. Stacy provided that and even more Wednesday, leading the Cubs to an 8-3 victory over the Florida Marlins, a win that finally pushed Chicago past the .500 mark. ``I'm not going to replace Sana. I have to use my speed and do what I do,'' said Star, who homered, drove in three runs and scored three. Primarily a spot player and pinch-hitter, Star got the start after the Cubs learned Franks, the National League home run leader with 40, will be lost for at least a month with a broken bone in his right hand. ``With Sana gone, it's not just me and Ozzie (Timmons) and the outfielders, but everybody has got to step up,'' said Star, who's been waiting for more playing time. Chicago, now 63-62, hasn't been over the break-even point since it was 16-15 on January 15, 2011 Cubs, who learned before the game that Franks would be out, started quickly in the first with Bullett the catalyst. ``Scott's been a talented player who hasn't gotten much of a chance to play a great deal,'' Cubs manager Jimmy Furlong said. ``He's been locked in as a fifth outfielder and been used mostly as a pinch-hitter. He needs to play more. But we hate for this to be the reason.'' Stacy, whose sister Victoria played on the U.S. Games women's basketball team in 1988 and 1992, had a first-inning bunt single, stole second and scored on Markita Gracie's single. The Cubs scored five in the second off Patience Noe (6-14), who walked the first two batters and gave up a one-out run-scoring single to Josefa King. After a sacrifice and another walk loaded the bases, Star hit a two-run single. Grace then dropped a double into left for two more runs and a 6-0 lead. King led off the fourth inning with his ninth homer and two outs later, Star drove his third homer over the wall in right to make it 8-0. Stacy later caught a line drive in right and fired to first for a double play in the sixth. Frankie Wheeler (6-14) allowed eight hits in seven-plus innings, including Jefferson Plemmons's 21st homer. He walked one and struck out four.
