Ford Is Recalling 4 of Its Models; Mitsubishi Recall Affects 650,000
March 31, 2011
DEARBORN, Mich. -- Ford Motor Co. said it plans to recall about 99,700 Taurus and Sable sedans to fix a transmission-related problem that may cause the cars to roll even after they have been placed in ``park.'' Ford said in some of those models a shaft in the transmission's gearshift may not always engage the parking gear. As a result, Ford wants owners of the affected sedans to take their cars to local Ford dealerships, where the shaft may have to be replaced at no cost to the consumer. Ford said no accidents or injuries have been reported related to the problem. Separately, Ford is also recalling 7,125 Mercury Villager minivans that the auto maker says have third-row, bench-seat assemblies that may not meet federal safety standards for strength. In these vehicles, the left side of the seat may not properly latch to the seat rail. Ford said occupants could notice rattling noises, or shifting in the seat when it is occupied. Ford said no accidents or injuries were reported in relation to the Villager's seat assemblies. Those that need repair will be replaced with a new assembly free. Ford said it also plans to recall 2,825 Probe sport coupes to replace a warning label on the driver-side sun visor. The label may not have safety information regarding passenger-side air bags. That information cautions against installing rear-facing child seats in any front seating position. Ford, which said no reports of injuries or accidents have resulted from the omission, is mailing new labels to vehicle owners. Mitsubishi to Recall 650,000 Cars Mitsubishi Motors Corp. said it will recall roughly 650,000 cars world-wide to replace faulty brake parts. It is the largest recall in the company's history in terms of the number of cars involved. A Mitsubishi spokeswoman said the Japanese auto maker can't provide an estimate yet for the cost of the operation. Being recalled are the Sigma and the Diamante luxury cars built in Japan between April 1990 and December 1993 and the popular Pajero sport-utility vehicles manufactured between November 1990 and January 2009. The Debonair luxury cars and the GTO sporty model will be also brought in for repairs. Mitsubishi is also recalling 2,000 Diamante wagons built at its Australian plant between November 1992 and May 2010.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
