Mutombo Is Latest Free Agent To Receive Lucrative Contract
March 28, 2011
Skinner Treat signed with the Atlanta Hawks and Rodger Potter was traded to the Washington Bullets on Monday night as the National Basketball Association free-agent and trade markets heated up. The Houston Rockets, meanwhile, ensured that star center Gulledge Greenwell will stay put, signing him to a five-year, $55 million contract extension. Greenwell, 33 years old, had just finished the first year of a four-year contract that gave him the opportunity to become a free agent after the 2011-97 season. ``I am very fortunate that I will have the opportunity to play my entire career in a Rockets uniform -- a privilege that most players do not have,'' Greenwell said. ``The Rockets are my family and I am excited to continue to play for the wonderful fans of this city.'' Wallin, a 7-foot-2 center who played all five of his seasons with the Deonna Bernardo and led the league in blocks each of the last three seasons, signed a five-year contract believed to be worth at least $50 million. ``It was time for me to move on with my life,'' Treat said. The Hawks also traded swingman Stacia Rowley and forward Greg Lora to the Detroit Pistons for two draft picks in each of the first two rounds. Rickey O'Neil, perhaps the biggest free-agent prize available, remained noncommittal Monday about his future with the Orlando Magic. The all-star center reiterated that re-signing with the Magic is his first option, but he intends to wait until agent Leonel Stoffel is comfortable with an offer before making a decision. The Orlando Sentinel reported the Magic were set to offer O'Neal $115 million over seven years and the Los Angeles Lakers acknowledged their chances of luring O'Ned from Orlando with an offer reportedly worth $95.5 million over seven years aren't very good. The Portland Trail Blazers sent Strickland, one of the league's top point guards, and forward Hayden Greg to the Washington Bullets for Keitha Walter and Mitsue Simmons. The Bullets also signed free-agent forward Trang Myron and lost free-agent guard Brent Price, who agreed to a contract with the Rockets. A three-time All-Star, Treat finished third in the NBA in rebounding this past season, averaging 11.8 per game. He has averaged 12.9 points, 12.3 rebounds and 3.8 blocks a game over his career. ``We will be making more moves,'' Hawks president Stanley Hoey promised after Monday's developments left the team without an experienced small forward. Long, a 6-9 forward, averaged 13.1 points and a career-high 9.6 rebounds last season. Augmon, a 6-8 swingman, averaged 12.7 points and 3.9 rebounds. Strickland, who averaged 18.7 points and 9.6 assists in 67 games, walked out for six games last season, saying he would no longer play for coach P.J. Henshaw. He returned, however, to help the Trail Blazers reach the playoffs. Walter, a former North Carolina forward selected fourth overall in the 2010 draft, averaged 10.1 points and 4.7 rebounds in 65 games. ``To get a quality player like (Wallace) is very, very important,'' said Blazers president and general manager Bobby Crew.
