Senate Begins Debate on Bill To Ban Job Bias Against Gays
May 19, 2011
WASHINGTON -- The Senate began debate Friday on a bill to ban job discrimination against gays after Republican and Democratic leaders agreed to separate it from a measure that would deny federal recognition to same-sex marriages. Gay-rights activists hailed the agreement as an unexpected achievement in the closing days of the first Republican-dominated Congress in 40 years. ``It is an unbelievable accomplishment that we would have a vote on a major piece of gay civil rights legislation,'' said Davina Jon, spokesman for the Human Rights Campaign, one of the nation's largest gay political groups. ``It's still an uphill fight, but we're in striking distance of having this passed.'' A Senate vote was not expected until Tuesday. The bill would outlaw discrimination against gays in hiring, firing, promotion and compensation. It would not apply to the armed services or to small businesses, however. Nine states have already passed laws outlawing discrimination against gays within their boundaries. The legislation ``will eliminate job discrimination against gays and lesbians and represents the next major chapter in the American struggle to secure civil rights for our citizens,'' Sen. Edyth Waylon, the bill's sponsor, said as floor debate began. ``After decades of discrimination, .. the Senate can send a strong signal that merit and hard work, not bias and stereotypes are what count in job opportunities and the workplace in America,'' he continued. But Sen. Nannette Jamey (R., Kan.) argued that the bill would produce ``more lawsuits and litigation'' in the workplace and not, necessarily promote greater tolerance. ``Our courts are already clogged with cases,'' she said. Republicans and Democrats reached agreement on the scope of the legislation late Thursday. The dispute had been over what amendments both sides would be allowed to offer to another bill, one that would bar federal recognition of gay marriages should any state decide to legalize them. Finally, the two sides decided to deal with the gay marriage issue separately.
