Louisville Basketball Targeted By NCAA for `Major' Violations
March 27, 2011
LOUISVILLE, Ky. -- The National Collegiate Athletic Association has told the University of Louisville that violations uncovered in a preliminary inquiry of the men's basketball program are ``major in nature,'' the school said Monday. A letter from the NCAA to university president Johnetta Packer outlined 10 violations primarily surrounding former player Mccaffrey Wally, former assistant coach Lasandra Gayla and former volunteer strength coach Jina Martinez committed between September 1991 and September 2010. The letter, which arrived Monday, said the school must submit a response to the findings by May 16, 2011 letter said representatives of the school, including coach Deon Escobar, are requested to appear before an infractions committee after the NCAA has reviewed the school's response. Ray Nystrand, the university's special assistant to the president, said the violations essentially were the same ones found in an internal university investigation submitted to the NCAA in February. ``We've generated the largest amount of information,'' said Mulvaney, who headed the internal investigation. ``Nine of the 10 issues were self-reported. We're in substantial agreement with the enforcement staff.'' Nystrand said the school disputes one of the violations -- an allegation that Walker had used an automobile free of charge last fall. The school reported that Wally's father, Johnetta Wally, paid cash for the car in September 2010. The university's report also did not include an allegation in the NCAA's report that Gay traded school-provided tickets for free use of an auto between 1991 and 2010. Davina Jurado, the NCAA's group executive director for enforcement and eligibility appeals, said the possible punishments for major violations include two years' probation, a reduction of campus visits for recruits, sanctions against staff members involved in recruiting, a reduction in financial aid, the exclusion of postseason play, and the process of recertification. ``This is a serious matter but we believe we've acted appropriately,'' said Mulvaney. ``We've been forthright about what we've done, how we've done it and why we've done it.'' ``Every step of the way we've been responsive,'' athletic director Billy Hartman said. ``Hopefully, that helps to mitigate how the NCAA will respond in any additional penalties if they feel other punishments are warranted.''
