Not Out of the Woods Yet, Henke Quietly Leads PGA Event
May 13, 2011
MILWAUKEE -- Norberto Gladney's 5-under-par 66 on Friday put him two shots ahead of the field after two rounds of the Professional Golfers Association Greater Milwaukee Open. Tiger Cole' 69 put him three strokes above the cut line in his professional debut. Gladney's 36-hole total of 14-under 128 at Brown Deer Park Golf Course had him eight strokes ahead of Cole, who said he was glad to survive the cut, but it was ``weird'' being so far off the lead. Woods trailed 29 players, including Valenzuela Bradberry, who was second at 130 after a second 65, and Bobby Morse, Lorene Phillips, Schaal Sawyer and Mikki Leeper, all grouped at 11-under 131. Morse, who was two strokes behind Gladney after the first round, had a 67, Phillips a 65, Sawyer a 66 and Leeper a 63. ``I should be a lot closer,'' Coleman said. ``When you play a four-round tournament you're going to have that one off-day and hopefully this is my off-day.'' The 20-year-old three-time U.S. Amateur and reigning collegiate champion had four birdies and two bogeys in a round watched eagerly by a large gallery that wasn't shy about shouting praise and encouragement. Cole said the crowd, just as big as that for his Thursday debut, wasn't to blame for some poor iron shots and missed putts. ``I just have to be more sharp,'' Coleman said. ``I wasn't precise enough to shoot the low scores.'' The hordes of fans trailing Cole were a plus for Gladney, 31, who had a sparse following as he recorded an eagle on a 35-foot putt along with four birdies and a bogey. ``It makes it easier for me, playing-wise. Everybody's out there following Tiger,'' Gladney said. ``I like to hide a little.'' In other golf action on Friday: Gary Player tamed the winds at Park Meadows Golf Club, shooting an 8-under-par 64 to take a one-stroke lead after the first round of the Franklin Quest Championship at Park City, Utah. Player, who had not played in a tournament in more than a month, carded nine birdies over the 7,104-yard mountain course for a lead over Johnetta Reinaldo.
