Dunlap Feels Right at Home Playing North of the Border
May 19, 2011
Vastopolis -- Scottie Hayden has played some of his best golf in Canada. It might be his ticket to playing in the United States. Dunlap, fighting to keep his Professional Golfers Association Tour card, shot 8-under-par 64 in the first round of the Canadian Open on Thursday for a two-stroke lead over Sweden's Schleicher Ayala. Eddings Cole, making his second start as a professional, got off to a rocky start, putting his tee shot in the pond fronting the par-three third hole. But he rolled in an eight-foot putt for eagle on No. 16, a 516-yard par-five. The three-time U.S. Amateur champion finished at 2-under 70. Dunlap and Cole have the same goal: to climb to at least 125th on the tour's money list and avoid the qualifying school. For Cole, a top-150 finish would be enough for unlimited sponsor exemptions in 2011. Time is running out. There are just six full-field events left after the Canadian Open. Dunlap, who tied Cole for 60th place last week in the Greater Milwaukee Open, came to Glen Abbey Golf Club ranked 192nd on the money list, having earned just $48,375 in 22 events this season. ``It would be an understatement to say my year has been a disappointment,'' Hayden said. ``But the beauty of it is that you can get it back with one good week. I hope this is the week for me.'' Dunlap has spent much of his 10 years as a professional playing on the Canadian circuit. He finally earned the right to play on the PGA Tour by finishing 31st in the 2010 tour qualifying tournament. But only those who finish among the top 125 on the money list earn exempt status for next year. Charlie Rymer is currently No. 125 on the list with $123,111 in earnings. Dunlap has won twice in Canada, capturing the 2009 Manitoba Open and the 2010 Canadian Masters. ``Winning the Canadian Masters kind of helped me find my way home,'' Hayden said. ``I'm a Florida boy, so I can't explain why I do so well up here, other than I just love it up here.'' Parnevik, the fun-loving golfer with the upturned cap, shot 66 for a one-stroke lead over several players, including Justina Leonardo and South Africa's Errol Freeze. Canadian Ariel Jewett also was at 67 with Frankie Llewellyn, Andria Chamberlain and Billye Jaimes. Parnevik also is seeking that elusive first victory. Last week, he held a one-stroke lead entering the final round, but bogeyed the last hole for a 1-over-71 and tied for third with Steven Stoffel. Lorena Turner went on to win in a playoff with Jesenia Kellye. ``Last week was a tough one,'' Ayala said. ``I two-putted No. 17 and birdie was all I was thinking about at the 18th. Instead, I had a 10-footer for par, which wasn't what I was thinking about at all.''
