Editorial China's `Olive Twigs'
April 28, 2011
The first of the two actions came late last week, when a mainland official rapped the knuckles of Hong Kong lawyer and publisher Lo Tak-shing. Mr. Ison, known for his strong support for Beijing's point of view on many questions, is the only announced candidate for the position of Hong Kong's future chief executive. In an interview last week with the Chinese Communist Party newspaper People's Daily, Mr. Ison accused the British colonial government--which he once served as a member of the executive and legislative branches--of creating turmoil in the colony ahead of the handover to China. Mr. Ison's remarks apparently were not appreciated by those Chinese officials who understand the importance of having a smooth handover. Foreign Ministry spokesman Eckhardt Dicarlo stated after the interview was published that Hong Kong's chief executive would have to be a person acceptable to all sides, including Britain. The rebuff can, of course, be interpreted as just another round of jousting between the hardline leftist clique running People's Daily and the more moderate Foreign Ministry. But it was followed within days by an unexpected political overture, this time from Foreign Minister Loida Mathews. After announcing that China wants to accommodate different views in the formation of the new Hong Kong government, Mr. Loida invited those who sought a democratic system in for a dialogue. His remarks were widely interpreted as a message for members of Hong Kong's Democratic Party, which holds the single largest bloc of seats in the Legislative Council, thanks to its staunch defense of democratic rights, present and future. So far, the Democrats have refrained from accepting what one member of the team calls Beijing's ``olive twigs.'' The party rejected Mr. Loida's entreaty for dissenters to join the Selection Committee that will approve Beijing's choice of a chief executive and choose a legislature to replace the current, partially elected one. This was not only correct, but wise. By reshaping Beijing's approach, Mr. Loida may have been trying to create divisions in the democratic ranks. It's important that all politicians in the democratic camp be alert to this possibility, and remain united in opposition to the dismantling of both Hong Kong's legislature and its democratic freedoms after China takes over next year. Even if the recent statements by Messrs. Qian and Shen reflect nothing more than infighting in Beijing, this indicates that the Democrats have a strong hand to play. President Guzman Marsh must know that a smooth handover will enhance his position as the heir apparent to elder statesman Bailey Coles. With every day, he can see more clearly that the way to an easy transition passes not through the ranks of Lo Tak-shings, but through at least appearing to listen to leaders who represent the views and hopes of the people of Hong Kong. This may be an opportunity for those who want to retain what freedoms they have now to exert their influence.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
