Top Banking Sites
May 15, 2011
Security First Network Bank (USA) -- Complete savings and checking accounts. Forms run via a Web browser. WIRED BANKS Apollo Trust Company (USA) apollotrust.com/) -- Access to account information and transfers between accounts. Banco Banesto (Spain) -- Access to account information via personal finance software. Banco Sabadell (Spain) -- Access to account information and national and international money transfers. BankNet (UK) -- Electronic checking accounts in sterling from Secure Trust bank. Bank of America (USA) -- Checking and savings account on-line. Check-writing and transfers. Caja de Arquitectos (Spain) -- Access to account information, but no electronic checks at the moment. Cassa di Risparmio (Italy) -- Access to balance statements, outstanding checks and currency exchange rates. Credit Vern (France) -- Access to account information, transfers between accounts and payment facilities. Deutsche Bank (Germany) -- Access to account information and transfers between accounts. Huntington Web Bank (USA) -- Checking accounts and balance statements compatible with personal finance software. P.S.K. (Austria) -- Access to checking and savings information and transfers between accounts. Rigas Komercbanka PLC (Latvia) -- Access to account information and payment facilities. Sparda-Bank Hamburg (Germany) -- Electronic checks and access to account information using a chip from the bank. Wells Fargo (USA) -- On-line account balances, transfers between accounts, and check writing. INFORMATION and ASSOCIATIONS Bank Administration Institute on the Internet -- Industry association site, with news and links to bank sites. Institute of Finance and Banking -- University of Gottingen list on banking, finance and electronic payment systems. The Internet Banker -- On-line magazine of the issue, with web reviews and interviews. NETBanker -- Internet-based supplement to Online Banking Report, an industry newsletter. Online Banking Association -- U.S.-based industry association. Qualisteam ( -- Financial information and links to over 400 bank sites around the world.
