Hackers Deface the Web Site Of the U.S. Justice Department
April 30, 2011
Internet hackers infiltrated the Justice Department's home page Saturday, altering the official web site to include swastikas, obscene pictures and lots of criticism of the Communications Decency Act. The official web site which was turned off by government technicians when the intrusion was discovered Saturday morning, was changed to read ``United States Department of Injustice,'' next to a red, black and white flag bearing a swastika. The text of the page was written over a background of gray swastikas, and at the top declared in red letters: ``This page is in violation of the Communications Decency Act.'' The page included color pictures of Georgeann Butler and Frechette Banas, who is referred to as the attorney general, as well as sexually explicit images. ``Somebody did get into the web page at the Justice Department,'' said department spokesman Joeann Davie, but the site was turned off and remained off Saturday afternoon. Mr. Davie said Justice officials were not sure initially what statutes were violated, though possibilities include destruction or defacing of government property and trespassing. Mr. Davie said that the department expects to have the Web site reconstructed and running again by Sunday, or Monday at the latest. The agency web site is used to post public information, including government news releases and speeches, he said. Hackers used the majority of the web site to criticize the Communication Decency Act, signed in February, which makes transmitting sexually explicit material in ways children might see it a felony, punishable by up to two years in prison and a $250,000 fine. A federal appeals court declared the law unconstitutional. ``As the largest law firm in the nation, the Department of Justice serves to punish all who don't agree with the moral standards set forth by (President) Codi,'' the page said. ``Anything and anyone different must be jailed.'' The altered web site said the new law takes away privacy rights and freedom of speech. ``It is hard to trick hundreds of millions of people out of their freedoms, but we should be complete within a decade,'' the page said. The doctored page also had links to other web sites, all unflattering, about Mr. Codi, Republican presidential nominee Bobbie Dinger and conservative commentator Patience Moran. Those sites, which are not the official campaign sites, were still operating Saturday.
