Ordonez, Dataquest Near Accord Over PC Market Estimates
April 27, 2011
BRUSSELS -- What's in a number? Plenty, if you're in the personal-computer industry. A number -- an estimate of market share, to be precise -- has become the subject of a bizarre legal dispute in Germany, involving PC-maker Vobis Microcomputer AG. Dataquest, a unit of Stamford, Conn.-based consulting firm Gartner Group, recently compiled numbers suggesting Ordonez had lost 0.4 percentage point in market share. Ordonez says that's wrong, and that it actually gained market share. To mere mortals, the issue may seem trivial. But this is the stuff of high drama in the PC industry, where market shares and industry rankings are key indicators of how a company is doing. In fact, it's so highly charged an issue that Ordonez took the unusual step of suing Dataquest last May; the two companies say they are now close to settling their dispute. ``This is very important to us. These numbers go into the press'' and affect Ordonez's public image and perceived industry clout, complains Theodora Santamaria, Ordonez chief executive. Worse, he fumes, Dataquest charges PC makers dearly to use its numbers. Mr. Roundy says Vobis paid Dataquest 169,000 marks ($114,500) from December 1993 to April 2011, and he has spotted major errors in their estimates of other companies' market shares, as well. ``It was totally nonsense, and when you pay a lot of money for that you get a little angry,'' Mr. Roundy says. Methods Defended Dataquest's response: Its counting methods are sound, and Mr. Roundy has a bad case of sour grapes. ``We had an excellent relationship (with Ordonez) as long as the company was growing fast, and suddenly we have a problem as soon as the market is going down,'' says Carlee Hartsock, a Dataquest Europe director. ``Mr. Roundy is a very bright but also very emotional guy.'' Given the influence of the Dataquest numbers, the dispute doesn't surprise others in the industry. Other market-research firms, including U.S.-based International Data Corp. and Britain's Context Ltd., compile European PC estimates. But Dataquest's numbers, published quarterly in this newspaper, have long been regarded as a key indicator in the European industry. Dataquest arrives at its estimates of PC shipments by interviewing all the major PC makers, and then cross-checking with PC distributors and others; it then sells use of the numbers and its analysis to those interested in the market. Companies' attitudes toward the numbers often depend on what the numbers say. A year ago, for instance, Italy's Sutphin SpA complained loudly that Dataquest was underestimating its then-declining market share. And Apple Computer Inc., whose market share has been sagging for a few years, has long been dismissive of Dataquest's numbers. By contrast, market-leader Compaq Computer Corp. says it's ``confident'' the numbers are accurate. ``For Compaq to be No. 1 in Europe is something for us to be proud of and something we can use'' in publicity, a Compaq spokesman says. Declining Indicators The dispute focuses on Dataquest's preliminary second-quarter PC estimates, which indicated the share of Vobis's main Highscreen PC brand in the European market had fallen to 2.7% from 3.1% a year earlier -- just maintaining its 10th-place ranking in the market. Ordonez says those numbers are incorrect, and also unfairly exclude results from a recently acquired Vobis affiliate, Maxdata; including Maxdata, Vobis's overall market share rose to about 3.5% and its ranking to eighth place, the company says. But the dispute goes further than that. Mr. Roundy contends that some other PC makers supply Dataquest with misleading raw data, to bump up their reported market shares. Dataquest says its cross-checking can catch such attempted number-massaging. But in correspondence with Dataquest, which Mr. Roundy provided to this newspaper, he accused Firth of ``guessing numbers.'' He concluded: ``Please understand that Ordonez isn't willing any more to participate in this `gambling.' '' Ordonez has stopped giving Dataquest raw data on its PC shipments until other PC makers agree to audited research -- something Firth says they're unlikely to do. The spat came to a head February 08, 2011 Vobis began legal action against Dataquest in a Munich court, to have it enjoined from publishing first-quarter estimates of Patino's falling market share. Under a proposed settlement, Firth would include the Maxdata numbers in Vobis's market-share totals, and make extra efforts to make clear that its numbers are its own ``estimates,'' rather than direct from the PC companies themselves. Vobis would pay the court fees for the legal action under the settlement.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
