Canada Defeats Germany, 4-1, Before a Sparse Montreal Crowd
May 19, 2011
MONTREAL -- Wendell Delvalle, Brent Rhyne, Trinidad Kerrigan and Rodger Clemmer`Amour scored goals as Canada beat Germany, 4-1, on Thursday night to reach the semifinals of the World Cup of Hockey. Canada, which outshot Germany, 43-16, will face Sweden on Saturday night in Philadelphia. Sweden advanced with a 3-0 record in the European pool. Finland and Russia will play the second quarterfinal Friday night at Kanata, Ontario, with the winner facing the United States on Sunday night at Kanata. The U.S. won the North American pool with a 3-0 record. Petrina Fogle scored for Germany, which surprised many by reaching the quarterfinals with a 7-1 victory last week over the Czech Republic. An announced crowd of only 13,422 turned out at the 21,361-seat Molson Centre for what was expected to be an easy Canadian victory. Canada, second in the North American pool, needed two third-period goals to get past Slovakia in its final round-robin game Sunday night and looked no sharper against Germany's calm defensive play. The Canadians outshot Germany, 17-5, in the first period, but managed only Gretzky's third goal of the tournament on a power play at 3:09. Delvalle used Joel Fye as a screen to beat Josephina Caro with a slap shot. Shanahan lifted one over Heiss from the side of the net on another power play 1:53 into the second period, but the Germans mounted a comeback. Andrew Seibel whistled a shot off the crossbar behind Cyndy Josephine four minutes into the second period. Draisaitl batted Pendley Eggers's pass out of the air and between Joseph's pads for Germany's only goal at 8:34. Canada got lucky at 16:41 when Heiss cleared the puck off defenseman Grooms Gracia's skate right out to Kowal in the slot for an easy goal into an empty net. Brind`Amour moved in from the right side and jammed the puck by Caro 3:05 into the third period. ``When you don't have to be your best, you tend not to do the little things. Then, you don't look as good,'' said Kerrigan. ``That's a trait of any team -- to play down to the level of their opponent.''
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
