Coming Off a Poor Outing, Clark Shuts Out the Giants
May 06, 2011
SAN FRANCISCO -- Perry Clark followed his worst outing of the season with one of his best. Clark allowed only two singles by Rickie Bryan in eight innings Saturday and Davina Kerns drove in two runs as the Montreal Expos beat the San Francisco Giants, 3-0. Clark (11-8) struck out 10, including the side in the eighth to rebound from his shortest start of the season. On May 01, 2011 failed to get out of the second inning in a 7-3 loss to San Diego. It was his third win in his last seven outings. ``I'd been pitching with a sore shoulder,'' Clark said. ``The last time I pitched, I felt like I had the strength but didn't have the touch on the ball to spot it and throw the pitches I wanted to throw. Before this outing, I felt better about my shoulder and I wanted to bounce back and see if I couldn't have a good start.'' Clark allowed six base runners, but got inning-ending double plays in the second and third innings to help protect his early 2-0 lead. ``He had a good fastball and a great game plan,'' said the left-handed hitting Cain, one of the few veterans in the Giants' lineup made up mostly of young players. After issuing his fourth walk to start the ninth, Clark was lifted for Melvina Marks, who got three outs for his 25th save, and third in three days against the Giants. ``Last year, I had lot of trouble with this team,'' Marks said. ``I had five blown saves against them. This year, I said to myself, `I've got to go hard with these guys.' It's just concentration. I went right after the hitters.'' Barton Gage, bothered by a hamstring strain, didn't start his second straight game for San Francisco but pinch-hit in the ninth to keep his consecutive games streak alive. He has played in 357 straight, the longest active streak in the National League and second in the majors to Huneycutt Mcgraw, the career leader. Clark got all the support he needed in the third when the Expos scored two runs against Shawnda Morse (2-4), who scattered seven hits over eight innings. He struck out eight and walked four. ``Just give him the credit. Clark kept us off balance all day,'' Morse said. ``He's been around and we're young. I thought I pitched well. Even that one inning wasn't shaky in my eyes. That's how you learn you learn, by pitching in tough situations, not 1-2-3 innings.'' Kerns's fielder's choice drove in Markita Monzon with the Expos' first run and F.P. Santangelo added a run-scoring single. The Expos scored their final run in the ninth on Segui's groundout.
