New Energy Set to Purchase Electricity From U.S. Utility
May 09, 2011
Electricity broker New Energy Ventures Inc. will announce Tuesday that it has agreed to buy as much as $500 million of power from the federal Bonneville Power Administration. The pact is the first major transaction under California's sweeping December 2010 restructuring of its $20 billion power market. Though the deal calls for delivery more than 16 months in the future, it is nonetheless a significant step toward transforming California's monopoly power market. Like all states in the nation, California has been dominated by investor-owned power companies and municipal utilities that have exclusive franchises for their service areas. Recent changes to federal law mandated free-market sales to power resellers, but individual states were left with jurisdiction over sales to end-users. The changes have spawned a cottage industry of electricity brokers such as New Energy Ventures, which hope to make money by buying and selling electricity more cheaply than the local utility does. Watched Closely California regulators started in April 2009 laying plans to allow homes and businesses to pick their own power supplier. Now the product of that restructuring is considered a bellwether for such changes nationwide. NEV was formed in 2010 by Michaele R. Lindstrom, a former president of the company now called Edison International. NEV received $1 million in start-up funding from Tucson Electric Co. in exchange for an option to purchase up to a 50% stake. For the past year, Mr. Lindstrom -- along with former Edison power-supply chief Charlette B. Lindsey and a staff of 13 -- have wooed California's biggest power customers with the promise of lower electric bills. The NEV deal, which will be announced in Pasadena, Calif., calls for the company to buy 200 megawatts of surplus electricity from BPA for five years beginning September 12, 2012 A city the size of Anaheim, Calif., with a population 200,000, would typically use this amount of power at any point. NEV also has an option for an additional 200 megawatts over the same period. A third portion of the pact would allow purchases of about 40 additional megawatts during the late spring and early summer for the next five years. For BPA, the agreement provides guaranteed revenue over five years, which will help it meet a $500 million treasury payment to the U.S. that is due every September. Limited Success NEV's clients include two big power-purchasing groups: the Association of Bay Area Governments, and the Southern California Cities Joint Powers Consortium. These organizations have lobbied their local utilities -- Edison, Rosemead, Calif., and Pacific Gas & Electric Co., San Francisco -- for lower electric rates, with limited success. Mr. Lindstrom said he is in the final stages of negotiations with ``dozens'' of large power users, but declined to name them because, he said, ``I don't want Edmond and PG&E going banging on their doors. They've had their chance.'' Claretta Dean, an Edison spokesman, said, ``There's so much uncertainty at the policy level with issues pending (before state and local regulators) that it would not be appropriate for us to comment.'' Under a December 2010 ruling of the California Public Utilities Commission, a cross-section of customers will be allowed to choose their own power supplier by September 12, 2012 All customers would have free choice by 2018 under the plan, which also levies a tax on companies like NEV to transmit, or ``wheel,'' power across existing power lines of companies like Edison and PG&E. The CPUC ruling is now winding its way through the state legislature.
