European Commission Blesses Ciba-Geigy, Hartwig Cushman
March 29, 2011
BRUSSELS -- The European Union Commission Wednesday gave its blessing to the merger of Swiss pharmaceutical giants Ciba-Geigy AG and Sandoz AG, less than three months after it opened a detailed inquiry into the union because of competition concerns. The new company, Novartis, will become the world's second-largest pharmaceutical company after the U.K.'s Glaxo Wellcome PLC, with estimated global sales of 26 billion Swiss francs, or about $21.38 billion. The transaction, valued at $27 billion, is the biggest corporate merger ever. The green light was linked to efforts by the companies to give up some of their substantial hold on the market for certain animal health products, the EU's executive body said in a statement. Last May, the Commission said it had particular competition concerns in the sectors where both companies' activities overlap, specifically pharmaceuticals, crop protection and animal health. But the EU competition authority has now concluded that most of those competition concerns no longer exist, noting that ``the merger is predominantly of a complementary nature.'' In the animal health market, the Commission decided that the companies would have a too strong a presence in the market for anti-flea and tick products for use on small animals, such as cats and dogs. The Commission noted that Ciba-Geigy and Hartwig control three out of five of the available flea and tick products, with Hartwig's popular methoprene causing particular concern among competitors. It said the companies have agreed to grant nonexclusive licenses for methoprene and to supply licensees with methoprene until they can begin their own production. The Commission said the merger will also lead to a ``significant combined potential'' in the area of research and development. It concluded, however, that there were a sufficient number of strong competitors -- namely Glaxo Wellcome, Pharmacia & Upjohn Inc., Bayer AG and BASF AG of Germany -- to ensure Novartis wouldn't have a dominant position and that the R&D-intensive markets would remain ``dynamic.'' The Commission rarely blocks mergers preferring instead to request modifications and then grant a clearance. It has only blocked five mergers since 1990.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
