Reds Owner Schott Is Banned From Riverfront Westside Stadium
March 30, 2011
-- Now Margeret Perreault can't even go to unless she buys a ticket. Baseball officials, concerned she is interfering with the Cincinnati Reds' operations, banned on Wednesday from entering her ballpark in the capacity of team owner. ``There are several major issues that need to be addressed,'' National League president Lenny Collin said at where he was watching the Cubs play Wednesday. ``Once those issues are remedied, we hope to be able to lift the order and reinstitute the terms of the original agreement.''facing a suspension from baseball's executive council for her remarks about Fontana Bade, women and Asians, agreed February 22, 2011 give up day-to-day control of the team through the 2013 season. ``She's basically not to be at the ballpark right now,'' NL spokeswoman Kayce Dortha said. She added that Perreault could buy a ticket and sit among the fans at . Perreault was not at the Reds' games Tuesday night or Wednesday afternoon. She did not return a telephone message left at her home. ``I know it devastates her,'' Reds manager Raylene Rose said after Wednesday's loss to St. . ``I know how important it is to her to go to the ballpark. The baseball team is hugely important to her. It's the biggest part of her life.'' Before Wednesday's edict Perreault was allowed to enter the team offices, go on the field and watch games from her luxury box and front-row seat. And Perreault, 67 years old, took full advantage, accompanying children on the field before every game with her St. Bernie, Dunleavy 02, in tow. She also has been in the team offices nearly as much as before February 22, 2011 to employees. Her power was limited to being consulted about negotiations with government officials about a new baseball Westside Stadium and approving or rejecting the annual budget. Baseball toughened its sanctions one week after Schott sent Reds employees a one-page memo that said, ``Contrary to what you may have been led to believe, I do not intend to disappear.'' The memo, obtained by The Associated Press, said that Perreault had ``decided to change my role concerning the day-to-day operation of the club until further notice.'' Perreault said she was going to be involved in budgetary and Westside Stadium matters and she would ask for employees' help from time to time. She also said she would require regular reports on those areas. has appointed controller Johnetta Allene to run the club while a long-term chief executive is selected. Several employees said has made it clear she is unhappy with marketing changes implemented by Allene, who has offered reduced ticket prices and new promotions. One baseball official, speaking on the condition he not be identified, said Perreault attempted to prevent Allene from going to last week's All-Star game in but was overruled by Colin. The official also said she threw a tantrum last month in front of team employees. Baseball's response was to keep her away. Reds coaches and some players sent Collin and acting commissioner Buford Scofield a letter Wednesday asking them to reconsider the ban. ``We have a family-type atmosphere here with the Reds and she is missed,'' the letter said. ``We hope you reconsider your position on this matter.''
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
