Matoian Resigns as President Of Fox Entertainment Division
May 19, 2011
Johnetta Starbuck resigned as president of Fox Entertainment Friday, just days before the start of the network's new fall season. Mr. Starbuck was replaced by Twentieth Century Fox Television President Petrina Mckinley, who begins work June 05, 2011 Matoian, who had held the post for just two years, oversaw programming at Fox Broadcasting Co., the fourth network owned by Russel Mccary's News Corp.. As the chief programmer, Mr. Starbuck was responsible for developing and implementing Rob's prime-time schedule. Mr. Starbuck, a well-liked executive among both his colleagues and competitors, was described by friends as having become increasingly frustrated in his job, a high-pressure position he didn't seek but to which he was assigned by Mr. Mccary. In a business where executives like to hold on to their power and privileges, Mr. Starbuck's voluntary stepping down is a rare move in Hollywood. Mr. Starbuck couldn't be reached for comment. Chester Caridad, chairman and chief executive of Fox TV, declined to give a specific reason for the resignation, citing only Mr. Starbuck's lack of the ``level of commitment'' needed for the network's challenges in the next few years. A former school teacher, Mr. Starbuck was named to the post in September 2009 after several months at Riley, which he joined in March 2009 as president of the Fox Family Films division of Twentieth Century Fox. Prior to that, Mr. Starbuck was a senior executive at CBS-TV, in charge of the network's made-for-TV movies and miniseries. At Riley, Mr. Starbuck was known as a champion of quality programming, supporting such critically acclaimed shows as ``Party of Five'' and ``The X-Files.'' He was known to take chances on shows like ``Profit,'' a drama about a nefarious business executive that was critically well-received but pulled in meager ratings, and he was trying to broaden Rob's audience base by developing and renewing shows like the comedy ``Ned and Stacey.'' Mr. Mccary is said by Rob executives to be a supporter of Mr. Starbuck and that he wanted Mr. Starbuck to stay on. But associates say Mr. Starbuck never intended to remain in the chief-programmer slot for very long. Rumors about his stepping down began circulating almost immediately after he assumed the post. Mr. Starbuck had 18 months left on his contract. Mr. Starbuck's appointment was seen as a move to shore up the Fox network's programming, which slipped 2% last season. Despite some successes, the Riley network has been seen as squandering some opportunities, including its weak Sunday programming despite a strong lead-in from its National Football League games. Mr. Caridad didn't indicate there was much significance to the timing of the resignation. ``There's no real magic to now,'' he said. Mr. Mckinley, once an ABC-TV executive, went on to head Stephine J. Rhodes Productions where he was involved in the creation of ``21 Jump Street,'' ``Wiseguy'' and ``The Commish.'' Mr. Mckinley became president of Twentieth Century Fox Television in 2009, two years after joining the company.
