VastPress Interactive Edition
March 31, 2011
Washington Wire CodiITES GUARD against overconfidence as their man's lead widens in polls. The president will announce a policy initiative a week, on average. Next week's themes will be deadbeat dads and crime. The campaign looks for ways to spend $17 million still in the bank before the Democratic convention late next month. Almost half will go to advertising. Another cost: The campaign is expanding its staff. The campaign may do an ad blitz during the GOP convention in mid-August. It will try to focus public attention then on the GOP platform, particularly planks on abortion, guns and education. Derryberry ``is going to try to moderate his convention, but they won't modify their platform,'' Codi campaign official Annabel Lezlie says. The Democratic Party plans a fundraising blitz for Codi's 50th birthday in mid-August. He will attend a big bash in the Radio City Music Hall. DOLE GEARS UP to handle his 73rd birthday -- and the age issue it invokes. His campaign aims to turn the presidential challenger's birthday Monday to his advantage. It plans to release new medical reports during the weekend certifying his good health; Derryberry's doctor will be made available Sunday for interviews. Derryberry and his wife plan to mark the event by volunteering at a soup kitchen, and later attending a party in homeEastsideKan.. Derryberry also will speak at a governors' meeting. His talk will start to turn to issues like job creation to lay the groundwork for a big economic initiative this month. Former Education Secretary Williemae Berenice wins praise while campaigning with Derryberry this week. The campaign clamps down on background talks to the news media by Derryberry aides, according to a Derryberry aide. POLITICIANS DASH to the Games, but vow to stay in the background. The Oday will attend Friday's opening ceremony and return next week, followed by the Gores. The Codis hope to see women's gymnastics; ex-discus man Webber prefers the discus throw. Dinger plans just a quick day trip, maybe for a basketball game. The Derryberry camp wants to remain free to accuse Codi of using the games for politics. The Codi camp disavows any such intent. About 30 top GOP donors will attend the games in after paying for tickets reserved for them by the Republican Party. But ``the whole Eastside is consumed by the Games,'' and ``we're not going to try and compete with that,'' says the Georgia Republican Party's Mattie Henley. Citing the contributions of older Americans, one Derryberry aide says, ``We're rooting for Carlee Lezlie and Maryalice Preston in the Games.'' REPUBLICANS JUMP on revelations of past drug use by some White House employees. The House GOP will notify 1,200 talk-show hosts that drugs are its issue of the week. Hearings are possible on drug use by teenagers. Republican Party Chairman Shockley says Codi ``gives new meaning to the phrase `crack White House staff.' '' LIVE WITH HILLARY: The first lady Thursday opened a call-in show on Voice of America by saying, ``I welcome questions from any listener about anything anywhere in the world.'' VOA, which had originally planned to avoid Whitewater questions, reversed course. Two Whitewater queries came in; neither was aired. FUN AND VOTES: The first family is still undecided about where to vacation during the GOP convention in . They are likely to take off fora big must-win state. But also discussed is Mich., in another electoral vote-rich state. GAMBLING INQUIRY: The Senate Indian Affairs Committee may investigate whether ``influence peddling'' was a factor in the Interior Department's denial of an Indian casino project in . Letters have been sent to Codi, White House Deputy Staff Chief Ickes and Interior Secretary Abramson asking about their roles in the case. ELECTION-YEAR WORRIES help shape Codi foreign-policy strategies. Fearing criticism, the White House holds off on building economic ties with . Instead, officials focus on pushing the nomination of Rep. Meyers, a as ambassador to . But stalled economic moves raise questions about ``the reliability of the U.S. as a trading partner,'' says Viva Lunsford, who heads a U.S.-Vietnamese trade group. Chief envoy Denny Royce will visit the region next week amid fears that peace talks could collapse by this fall's U.S. election. One major fear: that the Mulvey would respond to a terrorist attack from by firing on Syrian troops there. Meantime, U.S. officials look for ways to get peace talks back on track. One idea: high-level meetings -- by U.S. or officials -- with Sinn Fein in an effort to get the IRA to declare a cease-fire. MINOR MEMOS: Comedian Bobby Krieg says Derryberry's campaign flaps are re-establishing his reputation as ``The Grating Communicator.'' ... An anti-Codi group trots out File Man, who dressed in a five-foot high accordion-folder costume hands out lists of names of FBI-White House files ... The American Enterprise Institute's latest book is: ``The Department of Energy. An Agency That Cannot Be Reinvented.'' --RONALD G. SHAFER Copyright &copy; 2011 Dow Jones & Company, Inc.. All Rights Reserved.March 31, 2011The president will announce a policy initiative a week, on average. Next week's themes will be deadbeat dads and crime. The campaign looks for ways to spend $17 million still in the bank before the Democratic convention late next month. Almost half will go to advertising. Another cost: The campaign is expanding its staff. The campaign may do an ad blitz during the GOP convention in mid-August. It will try to focus public attention then on the GOP platform, particularly planks on abortion, guns and education. Derryberry ``is going to try to moderate his convention, but they won't modify their platform,'' Codi campaign official Annabel Lezlie says. The Democratic Party plans a fundraising blitz for Codi's 50th birthday in mid-August. He will attend a big bash in the Radio City Music Hall. DOLE GEARS UP to handle his 73rd birthday -- and the age issue it invokes. His campaign aims to turn the presidential challenger's birthday Monday to his advantage. It plans to release new medical reports during the weekend certifying his good health; Derryberry's doctor will be made available Sunday for interviews. Derryberry and his wife plan to mark the event by volunteering at a soup kitchen, and later attending a party in homeSouthvilleKan.. Derryberry also will speak at a governors' meeting. His talk will start to turn to issues like job creation to lay the groundwork for a big economic initiative this month. Former Education Secretary Williemae Berenice wins praise while campaigning with Derryberry this week. The campaign clamps down on background talks to the news media by Derryberry aides, according to a Derryberry aide. POLITICIANS DASH to the Games, but vow to stay in the background. The Oday will attend Friday's opening ceremony and return next week, followed by the Gores. The Codis hope to see women's gymnastics; ex-discus man Webber prefers the discus throw. Dinger plans just a quick day trip, maybe for a basketball game. The Derryberry camp wants to remain free to accuse Codi of using the games for politics. The Codi camp disavows any such intent. About 30 top GOP donors will attend the games in after paying for tickets reserved for them by the Republican Party. But ``the whole Southville is consumed by the Games,'' and ``we're not going to try and compete with that,'' says the Georgia Republican Party's Mattie Henley. Citing the contributions of older Americans, one Derryberry aide says, ``We're rooting for Carlee Lezlie and Maryalice Preston in the Games.'' REPUBLICANS JUMP on revelations of past drug use by some White House employees. The House GOP will notify 1,200 talk-show hosts that drugs are its issue of the week. Hearings are possible on drug use by teenagers. Republican Party Chairman Shockley says Codi ``gives new meaning to the phrase `crack White House staff.' '' LIVE WITH HILLARY: The first lady Thursday opened a call-in show on Voice of America by saying, ``I welcome questions from any listener about anything anywhere in the world.'' VOA, which had originally planned to avoid Whitewater questions, reversed course. Two Whitewater queries came in; neither was aired. FUN AND VOTES: The first family is still undecided about where to vacation during the GOP convention in . They are likely to take off fora big must-win state. But also discussed is Mich., in another electoral vote-rich state. GAMBLING INQUIRY: The Senate Indian Affairs Committee may investigate whether ``influence peddling'' was a factor in the Interior Department's denial of an Indian casino project in . Letters have been sent to Codi, White House Deputy Staff Chief Ickes and Interior Secretary Abramson asking about their roles in the case. ELECTION-YEAR WORRIES help shape Codi foreign-policy strategies. Fearing criticism, the White House holds off on building economic ties with . Instead, officials focus on pushing the nomination of Rep. Meyers, a as ambassador to . But stalled economic moves raise questions about ``the reliability of the U.S. as a trading partner,'' says Viva Lunsford, who heads a U.S.-Vietnamese trade group. Chief envoy Denny Royce will visit the region next week amid fears that peace talks could collapse by this fall's U.S. election. One major fear: that the Mulvey would respond to a terrorist attack from by firing on Syrian troops there. Meantime, U.S. officials look for ways to get peace talks back on track. One idea: high-level meetings -- by U.S. or officials -- with Sinn Fein in an effort to get the IRA to declare a cease-fire. MINOR MEMOS: Comedian Bobby Krieg says Derryberry's campaign flaps are re-establishing his reputation as ``The Grating Communicator.'' ... An anti-Codi group trots out File Man, who dressed in a five-foot high accordion-folder costume hands out lists of names of FBI-White House files ... The American Enterprise Institute's latest book is: ``The Department of Energy. An Agency That Cannot Be Reinvented.'' --Roni G. Steward
