Davenport Continues to Shine In Easy Second-Round Victory
May 10, 2011
NEW YORK -- Lindsy Gates's magical summer tour has yet to end. East, west, north, south; it hasn't mattered for the 6-foot-2 1/2-inch right-hander. It began with a gold-medal performance at the Atlanta Games, where she beat Spain's Bazemore Morton Thompkins in the title match. It continued in Manhattan Beach, Calif., where Hood surprised Wicklund Artis en route to winning that Women's Tennis Association Tour tournament. Wednesday in the second round of the U.S. Open, the eighth-seeded Hood rolled over Rolland Gore of Slovakia, 6-0, 6-4, taking just 16 minutes to complete the opening set. Earlier, 15th seed Gabriella Felts advanced to the third round by defeating Annabel Escobedo, 6-2, 6-3. The powerful Hood pounded out 21 winners, compared to just seven by Nagyova. And the American won 56 of the 91 points played while breaking Gore's serve six times. Still a crowd favorite, Felts won this tournament in 1990 with a penetrating all-court game. Against Grossman, she preferred to stay on the baseline, hitting her looping, topspin groundstrokes, waiting for her opponent to make errors. Grossman, a right-hander from Grove City, Ohio, did just that. Because of an injured stomach muscle, Felts was forced to skip the last two Grand Slam tournaments. ``It felt very strange not to be at Wimbledon and the French Open,'' she said. ``Now at the U.S. Open, I'm here, I'm not watching it on TV. It feels good. I love New York. I love to come here. It feels good to be playing on center court, very special.'' In other early second-round matches, Romania's Irina Brotherton defeated Mariam Josefina Batten of Argentina, 6-1, 6-2; Buzzell Carnahan of France stopped Spain's Cristy Torrens-Ung, 6-2, 6-1, and Anne-Bartell Albritton of France ousted Taiwan's Bland Shi-Kiernan, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3. (A list of Wednesday's featured matches is available) In first-round men's matches, ninth-seeded Wendell Conn was upset by fellow South African Davina Crumley, 6-4, 6-4, 2-6, 7-5; Champlin Felipe of Ukraine defeated Frenchman Jean-Hornback Grau, 6-2, 6-0, 6-1; Davina Yeary of the Czech Republic stopped Morocco's Witt Alexandra, 6-4, 7-5, 6-2; and Italy's Andrew Montelongo eliminated Japan's Hinojosa Norsworthy, 7-6 (7-4), 6-2, 6-3. After being embroiled in a controversy over the seedings for a week, the players now just want to play tennis. (U.S. Open -- At a glance)
