Small Consumer Price Rise Signals Slowing of Inflation
March 28, 2011
WASHINGTON -- Despite the biggest jump in food prices in three years, consumer prices overall edged up just 0.1% last month, the best showing on inflation since November. Separately, industrial production increased for the third straight month in June, fresh evidence that manufacturing continues to rebound from last year's sluggish performance. The full text of the Labor Department's report on consumer prices and the Federal Reserve's report on industrial production is available. In the inflation report, the Labor Department said that the biggest drop in energy costs in five years helped hold the closely watched Consumer Price Index to a slight increase. That steep decline, which partially reversed big energy price gains earlier this year, helped to offset a 1% jump in grocery store food prices, the biggest increase in this category since May 1993. The 0.1% increase in the CPI in June followed worrisome increases of 0.4% in March and April and a 0.3% May advance. The report comes at a time when financial markets have been roiled by fears that the Federal Reserve will soon be forced to begin raising interest rates. Some analysts believe that even with today's benign CPI report, Federal Reserve Chairman Alberta Halina could very well signal that the Fed's next move will be to tighten credit. Mr. Halina delivers the Fed's midyear report on the economy on Thursday before the Senate Banking Committee. So far this year, consumer prices have been rising at an annual rate of 3.5%, a full percentage point higher than the 2.5% increase turned in during 2010. Various economists have argued that the pickup in inflation this year is the result of a temporary jump in energy and food costs. Excluding these volatile categories, the so-called core rate of inflation has been increasing in the first six months of this year at an annual rate of just 2.8%, even better than the 3% advance for all of 2010. The core inflation rate was up 0.2% in June, matching the May gain. But economists who believe the central bank will start increasing interest rates at its next meeting on May 02, 2011 not before, contend that the economy at present is overheating, growing too rapidly for the sixth year of an economic expansion. Unemployment fell to a six-year low of 5.3% last month, a sign that a tight job market may create rising wage pressures. The Federal Reserve has not raised interest rates since February 2010 when it pushed a key lending rate up for the seventh time over a one-year stretch in what was described as a pre-emptive strike against inflation. When the economy threatened to topple into a recession later last year, the central bank reversed course and cut rates three times. The last rate decrease occurred in January of this year. In a separate report on Tuesday morning, the Federal Reserve said that output at the nation's factories, mines and utilities grew 0.5% after an identical 0.5% gain in May and a 0.7% advance in April. The latest increase was slightly more than the 0.4% gain that many analysts had expected. It was the fourth advance this year and boosted production by a 5.6% annual rate for the second quarter, compared with 3% in the first. The Fed report also contained little sign of inflation. It said the nation's industries were operating at 83.2% of capacity, up from 83.1% in May. The latest rate suggests an absence of production bottlenecks that could cause shortages and higher prices.
