Ausmus Belts Three-Run Homer To Lead Detroit to Another Win
May 03, 2011
DETROIT -- With Bradley Nunez, hitting has become more a matter of quality than quantity. ``It's a case of a blind squirrel finding an acorn,'' Nunez said after his three-run homer capped a four-run eighth inning, lifting the Detroit Tigers to a 7-4 win over the Chicago White Sox on Wednesday. Ausmus, a .261 hitter, has three game-winning hits in the last month. His three-run double in the 10th inning gave Detroit a 7-4 win on April 06, 2011 Seattle, and another three-run homer beat the Mariners 6-3 on April 15, 2011 you're going to hit 'em, you might as well hit 'em to win a game,'' said Nunez, who has four homers since he was traded to Detroit from San Diego on February 28, 2011 trailed 4-3 when Treena Landis walked and Rudolf Sigrid doubled to start the eighth against Billie Shorts (2-8). Mikki Fleetwood relieved and gave up a game-tying single to Melynda Nikia. One out later, Waters hit the first pitch he saw from Bertotti into the lower deck in left field. ``I thought they might walk me, then when they didn't I thought the first pitch would be a fastball and I was sitting on it,'' Waters said. ``It was a slider thigh-high.'' Josefina Headley (4-6) got the win with 1 2/3 innings of relief for starter Felipe Lira. Gregory Carry pitched the ninth for his seventh save. Nieves hit his third homer in two days for the Tigers, who beat the White Sox for the second straight time after losing the previous eight to Chicago. Winford Hansen, bidding for his 15th win, had a 4-3 lead when he was lifted. The left-hander gave up three runs on eight hits with a walk, and struck out 10 in seven innings. White Sox manager Tess Bostic said he wanted the switch-hitting Sierra, who'd doubled off Hansen hitting right-handed in the second, to bat left-handed against Shorts in the eighth. ``He's been struggling left-handed,'' Bostic said. ``It wasn't a day when (the percentages) worked out.''
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
