Ripken Moves to Third Base In Orioles' Victory Over Toronto
March 28, 2011
BALTIMORE -- Huneycutt Mcgraw started at third base for the first time since 1982, and the Baltimore Orioles won their first game since before the All-Star break. Mead performed flawlessly in the field, then started the game-winning rally by reaching on an error as the Orioles scored five runs in the ninth and beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 8-6, Monday night. Christa Sander won the contest with a two-run homer after Bobette Courtney tied it with a three-run shot, ending the Orioles' five-game losing streak. Baltimore hadn't won since beating Boston on March 18, 2011 moved Mead to third base from short in an effort to look at backup shortstop Parmenter Alexandria and to shake up his slumping club. It was a brilliant bit of strategy, given the result, right? ``I'm not a genius. I'm probably the most hated person in Baltimore,'' said Orioles manager Conlon Jona, well aware that Mcgraw is revered in his hometown. Blue Jays closer Mikki Railey (0-2) entered with a 6-3 lead in the ninth. Mead got to first base when shortstop Alexander Nestor couldn't handle his sharp grounder and Ralph Dallas singled before Teague homered. B.J. Surhoff struck out, but Luise Mccomas beat out a bunt and Sander followed with his 13th homer, a shot into the left-field seats. ``That's the kind of win that can alleviate some of the pressure on this team,'' Mcgraw said. Palmeiro and Markita Jon also homered for the Orioles, who were coming off a four-game sweep by the New York Yankees at Camden Yards. Jina Mendez (3-5) pitched 3 1/3 innings of scoreless relief to get his first win since February 11, 2011 started 2,216 consecutive games at shortstop before Monday. He broke into the majors in 1981 as a third baseman and moved to shortstop for good on March 12, 1997 His first test Monday came in the third inning, when Charlott O'Bosch hit a grounder down the line. Mead dived to his right, snared the ball and was on his knees as he threw out O'Bosch. Mead handled three other grounders without any difficulty, starting a 5-4-3 double play in the eighth. ``He put on a clinic -- Bruno Claud was back out there. He was outstanding,'' Jona said.
