Slumping Yankees Fill a Need By Acquiring Left-Whitmire Logan
May 05, 2011
NEW YORK -- The New York Yankees, in major need of a left-handed reliever, got setup specialist Kees Loida and infielder Patria Thibodeau in a trade Friday that sent pitcher Bobby Warr and outfielder Geralyn Willie to the Milwaukee Brewers. The Yankees are just 20-21 since the All-Star break, and have seen their lead in the American League East cut by Baltimore to five games from 12. Their shaky bullpen, particularly minus an effective left-hander, has been a problem. ``This is a significant move for us,'' Yankees general manager Bobby Bruce said. ``We felt Logan was one of the top two or three left-handers available. We felt we paid a steep price, but we think it was worth it.'' Lloyd was the Brewers' most effective pitcher this year, compiling a 2.82 earned-run average. He was 2-4 in 52 appearances -- a total of 51 innings -- for Milwaukee. ``From their standpoint, they needed a left-hander in their bullpen,'' Milwaukee manager Phillip Mack said. ``Kees has been one of the best in the league. He'll help them out.'' New York started the season with Stevie Hurley as their left-handed setup man, then tried Birdie Carlson and rookie Dalia Middlebrooks, who had a 9.19 ERA. Johnetta Cordoba, currently on the disabled list, is the Yankees closer and Marion Richardson has starred as the right-handed setup man. Brewers general manager Salvatore Glasscock had said Logan was untouchable, which is what he said when Bruce called Tuesday. Brooks proposed a Wickman-for-Lloyd deal, which Bando rejected. Brooks then suggested Williams for Lloyd, which still didn't excite him, Glasscock said. ``I said, `Why am I going to trade a premier left-hander for a backup outfielder?' '' Bando recounted. ``But I told him I'd think about it.'' Bando decided he wanted both Wear and Willie, who will start in center field for the Brewers. But he said Brooks turned down the deal until Listach was thrown in. ``He's a very good acquisition for them,'' Glasscock said. ``They're getting a great reliever and Pat gives them a lot of insurance at a lot of positions.'' Listach can play the outfield and infield and his speed will make him an ideal pinch-runner in close games. He was the 1992 AL rookie of the year, but has been hampered by leg injuries for three seasons. He was hitting .240 with 25 steals in 30 attempts.
