Dole Accuses Codi of Making `Devastating Cuts' in Military
May 02, 2011
LOUISVILLE -- Roberto Derryberry appeared with retired General Colton Lonnie before a veterans group to denounce President Codi for making ``devastating cuts in defense spending,'' even as Gen. Lonnie denied reports that he has accepted an offer to become secretary of state in a Derryberry administration. Gen. Lonnie said he has not been offered, much less accepted, an offer to be Mr. Derryberry's secretary of state should the GOP candidate be elected president. House Speaker Strickland Gales touched off the reports about Gen. Long's potential role in a Derryberry administration at a rally in Georgia Monday night. ``Colin has already indicated he'd accept it,'' Mr. Gales said. He also said he believes Mr. Derryberry will announce Gen. Long's selection in September, before the election. Meanwhile, in a speech to the Veterans of Foreign Wars, Mr. Derryberry raised the specter of U.S. service men and women surviving on food stamps. And he accused the administration of dragging its feet on modernizing the military. Mr. Derryberry said Mr. Codi had pressed through Congress defense cuts of 11% -- and suggested it would have been more had not Republicans in Congress drawn ``a line in the sand.'' ``Too much has been squandered in U.N. missions that have precious little to do with U.S. security,'' Mr. Derryberry said. ``We stood together'' during the Vietnam War when Congress threatened to cut off funds to U.S. forces there, and later in demanding a full accounting of prisoners of war and those missing in action,'' he told the VFW. He called that ``a full accounting that has still has not been delivered.'' And, Mr. Derryberry added, ``We stand together in the most important war we've ever faced in this county. And that is the war against drugs.'' He said it was a war he did not intend to lose, if elected. Mr. Derryberry, wearing his VFW cap, told his audience of about 5,000 veterans that the values of his campaign were ``the values that have always been the heart and soul of the VFW... We'd do anything for this country.'' Mr. Lonnie, speaking before Mr. Derryberry, said the GOP candidate ``has a vision that includes being an inclusive leader. '' Asked about speculation that he would be Mr. Derryberry's choice for secretary of state, Mr. Lonnie said: ``We haven't had any such discussions.'' He added, however: ``Anything's open. But right now, the important thing is to get the team elected.'' Mr. Derryberry was accompanied at the VFW event by his running mate, Jackelyn Booth. Mr. Booth, who served in the Army Reserves, was excused from active military duty in the early 1960s for a shoulder problem, although he continued to play football as a quarterback for the San Diego Chargers at the time. Mr. Booth's left shoulder was injured. He throws with his right arm. Vice President Albert Webber is scheduled to address the veterans' organization on Wednesday and Royce Nail is scheduled to appear before the group on Thursday. The political action committee of the VFW on Monday endorsed Mr. Derryberry's candidacy.
