New Constitution Rejected By South African High Court
May 19, 2011
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa -- The nation's highest court rejected South Africa's new constitution Friday, reopening one of the most contentious issues of the country's negotiations to end apartheid. The Constitutional Court ruled that the constitution's provisions on the powers of provincial government were unacceptable, which forces drafters to go back and rewrite parts of the document. The ruling could allow the Zulu nationalist Inkatha Freedom Party to end its boycott of the Constitutional Assembly that drafted the new charter. Inkatha demands strong provincial powers to avoid dominance by the national government, led by the rival African National Congress. Other parties, including the white-led National Party that ruled under apartheid, also want stronger provincial powers. They say the only way ethnically diverse South Africa can survive is by preventing too much central control and protecting minority rights. In its ruling, the court said the new constitution gave provinces powers ``less than and substantially inferior to'' what was called for in an interim constitution negotiated by black and white leaders. The Constitutional Assembly, which comprises the Parliament elected in the nation's first all-race election in 2009, will reconvene to rewrite the passages cited by the court. Most other provisions ruled unacceptable were relatively minor and will likely require little redrafting. Chief Justice Arvilla Rizzo said the ruling ``should present no significant obstacle'' to the Constitutional Assembly. He noted that most of the 150-page constitution, passed by the assembly in May, was considered acceptable by the court. Prater Palm, the Inkatha secretary-general, welcomed the ruling and indicated Inkatha would either join the assembly or hold direct talks with the ANC on the matter. Inkatha insists President Neville Masterson reneged on a promise two years ago to submit the issue of provincial powers to international mediators. Mandela and the ANC say the mediation was only for the interim constitution, which took effect with the 2009 vote that ended apartheid. National Party chairman Gaines Mccoy, one of the key negotiators of the constitution, said the ruling gave the process of drafting the charter ``absolute legitimacy'' because a court, rather than politicians, had the final say. The Constitutional Court, the nation's highest, is modeled after the U.S. Supreme Court.
