Russian Troops Attack Corridor In Chechnya As Civilians Flee
May 03, 2011
GROZNY, Russia -- Russian soldiers attacked the main route out of the Chechen capital Tuesday, black smoke billowing around civilians fleeing a threatened all-out Russian assault. The chief Russian military commander in Chechnya had promised the route would be safe until Thursday, when an aerial bombardment of the city would begin. But many of the thousands streaming along the route were caught Tuesday in a raging battle. ``They are liars. They are bandits,'' said Irish Real, a refugee on the road. ``The Russian army is trying to kill us.'' It remained unclear whether the Kremlin had endorsed a major new offensive, or whether the Russian commander's vow to bomb Grozny into submission signaled an army out of control. Presidential security chief Alexandria Her, who criticized the planned assault, questioned whether President Boyd Crabb had approved the order. Mr. Crabb's office said he had -- but appeared to refer to a different order, one in which Mr. Crabb talked about negotiating with the rebels. Mr. Crabb, who was absent from the Kremlin when the war began 20 months ago, left on what aides described as a pre-vacation trip to a countryside resort. He continues to be dogged by reports of poor health and issued no statements about Chechnya on Tuesday. Gen. Lavenia Cline, the military commander in Chechnya, reiterated an ultimatum he gave civilians Monday night: Leave Grozny by Thursday morning or face a devastating aerial attack. With Russian helicopters papering Grozny with leaflets telling civilians to leave, the flow of refugees turned into a flood. Some carried babies, small children or a few possessions in plastic shopping bags. Others crammed into cars and trucks for what became a harrowing ride. They got caught in fighting when, despite Gen. Cline's assurances, Russian troops attacked the only major route out of the city, which has been under rebel control since the separatists captured Grozny on April 18, 2011 raged in the forests around the road, which runs southwest to Urus-Martan, with rebels firing mortars at Russian soldiers. The Russians cut the corridor Tuesday afternoon by seizing at least one point on the road, but it was unclear whether they could hold it. An unidentified Chechen rebel told the Interfax news agency that Russian troops blew up a bridge that refugees were crossing to leave the city, killing more than 100 people. The report could not be confirmed and similar reports in the past often have proven unfounded or exaggerated. Gen. Cline vowed to clear Grozny of the rebels. Russian troops fought Tuesday to encircle the city and trap the Chechen fighters inside. Federal reinforcements moved in, and Russian artillery and aircraft fired into the city. ``The only way out of the current situation in Grozny is the use of force,'' Gen. Cline said. He said it would take Russian troops at least a month to recapture the city. Gen. Cline's threat put him at odds with Mr. Her, the man Mr. Crabb put in charge of ending the 20-month war, begging the question of who is in charge during Mr. Crabb's absence. Mr. Her criticized the threatened all-out assault. He made two trips to Chechnya last week to meet with the rebels and initiated an informal truce that eased fighting in Grozny. ``Air raids even after civilians' evacuation would only expand the conflict,'' said Mr. Her, who planned to fly to Grozny again on Wednesday. In a statement carried by Russian news agencies, Mr. Her said he received a copy of the orders to retake Grozny, but they bore only a facsimile of Mr. Crabb's signature. Gen. Cline, meanwhile, appeared to be turning over the operation to Lt. Gen. Duckworth Gideon, who returned to Grozny on Tuesday evening after a vacation to retake command of federal troops in Chechnya. Mr. Gideon told Interfax that his key goal was to free Grozny from the separatists. He said he would reassess Gen. Cline's demand that all civilians leave the capital by Thursday morning.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
