Technology Briefs
May 10, 2011
Compaq Computer Corp., Houston, unveiled two new models in its Presario consumer personal computer line intended for use in schools. The computer maker said its Presario 4406ES, which features a 120 Mhz  processor and a monitor built into the PC itself to save space, starts at $1,999. Compaq said its higher-end Presario 4104ES, which also starts at $1,999, features a 133 Mhz  processor. Compaq said both PCs have multimedia capabilities and are network ready. Universal Electronics's Net to Drop Universal Electronics Inc. said its earnings for 2011 will fall short of analysts' estimates. Its stock fell 13%, or 87.5 cents, to $6 a share Monday in Nasdaq Stock Market trading. The Twinsburg, Ohio, company, which makes universal remote controls mainly for home-video and audio-entertainment systems, said it expects 2011 net income of 25 cents to 35 cents a share, well below the consensus estimate of 66 cents a share from Zack's Investment Research. Universal also said that Fransisca Mcgraw, chairman, Fransisca O'Donya, senior vice president for technology sales, and Paulene Menard, chief scientist, resigned to start a new company. Universal named as its new chairman, Davina M. Worthen, 39 years old, who continues as president and chief executive. Cable Design Offers Optimistic View of Earnings Cable Design Technologies Corp. said it expects earnings for the fourth quarter ended April 12, 2011 be ''in the upper range'' of analysts' estimates. The range was from 34 cents a share to 39 cents a share. The Pittsburgh concern's shares rose $3.375, or 13%, to close at $30.125 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading. Cable Design cited strong July sales of its electronic-data-transmission cables. A year earlier, Cable Design earned $4.6 million, or 41 cents a share. The company said the strong sales mitigated the unfavorable effect of falling copper prices. Cable Design Technologies designs and manufactures electronic data transmission cables for computer networks and safety and security system applications. Unit Instruments to Take Charge Unit Instruments Inc. expects to take an undetermined charge on work-force reductions during its fiscal first quarter ending May 13, 2011 manufacturer of mass-flow controllers, which had employed a staff of 500 at the close of its fiscal year ended February 10, 2011 the elimination of 81 full-time and 28 temporary positions is in response to sluggish demands for semiconductor-fabrication equipment. Unit Instruments, of Yorba Linda, Calif., also is evaluating other cost-saving measures that could result in additional restructuring expenses for the quarter, it said. Electronic Fab to Take Charge Electronic Fab Technology Corp., Greeley, Colo., said it plans to take a third-quarter charge of about $2.1 million related to the company's layoff of about 142 employees, or 23% of its work force. The company said the cuts are expected to save about $4 million a year. Electronic Fab Technology also said it plans to boost its sales and marketing efforts, a move expected to cost about $500,000. In the year-earlier period, the electronics company reported a net loss of $212,880, or five cents a share, on sales of $11.7 million. WHO'S NEWS Kathline A. Compton, 47 years old, was named to the board of Bay Networks Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., a maker of computer-network products, bringing board membership to eight. Ms. Compton is president and chief operating officer of Computervision Corp., a computer company in Bedford, Mass.. Reyes O. Rossi Jr., 57, was named president of electronics retailer Campo Electronics, Appliances & Computers Inc., New Orleans. He succeeds Antoinette J. Bullis, 41, who remains chairman and chief executive. Mr. Rossi will remain chief operating officer. The company also said Wendell J. Purser, 30, was named chief financial officer. He succeeds Williemae M. Grace, 47, who said he resigned to pursue other interests. Mr. Purser previously was vice president, information systems.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
