The On Line Center
March 25, 2011
On Line 7/20: Publishing used to cost a lot. Now the World Wide Web has dramatically lowered the financial barriers to entry into global information dissemination. But how does a Web cruiser sort the wheat from the chaff? On Line 7/13: Here's the hype: Women are driving Web expansion, creating a world of exciting, vibrant new sites. Now here's the reality: It's a man's world out there, in dollars and power. And if girls just want to have fun, you wouldn't know it from their on-line habits. On Line 7/6: The private on-line services are the convenience stores of cyberspace. But with the content explosion on the `Net, the corporate shift to intranet models and advertising becoming pragmatic via Web browsers, on-line services are increasingly embattled against new options. On Line 6/29: So you thought it was tough wiring your home office to the Internet? Ha. Try the continent of Africa, where one in 200 people have access to a telephone line, and much of the continent is overwhelmed with poverty and hunger. A report on a mission improbable. On Line 6/22: It's long been an elusive dream of the computer industry -- the truly democratic computer: affordable by all, usable by all and connected to all. But executing around this concept, of course, is not so easy. On Line 6/15: Legal experts, professors and arbitrators are circling the waters, looking for a few good test cases to sink their teeth into. But will the name grabbers and confidence tricksters who frequent the `Net yield to their allure? On Line 6/8: Everyone knows the World Wide Web offers millions of sites, tons of data and oodles of fun, but finding quality sites can be difficult. Changes are on the horizon for search engines to make finding the good stuff even easier. On Line 6/1: As the presidential race heats up, the political parties' Web sites are going multimedia, offering a deal some might find too close for comfort: a virtual ticket to the conventions. On Line 5/25:In the battle of the browsers, functionality can be both a curse and a blessing as users are less likely to interact with the ophisticated Web explorers as individual pieces of software, and more as applications within an operating system.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
