Business Bulletin -- VastPress Interactive Edition April 27, 2011 Business Bulletin CHINA'S CORPORATE GIANTS muscle their way into key Hong Kong industries. As China prepares to take over this flourishing fortress of free trade next July, its state-run powerhouses jockey for a piece of Hong Kong's more profitable businesses. Earlier this year, an arm of China's airline regulator bought a controlling stake in Hong Kong Dragon Airlines, a successful regional carrier run by Swire Pacific Ltd. of the United Kingdom. And a Shanghai firm has held talks to acquire Hong Kong's biggest retail brokerage firm, Sun Hung Kai Securities Ltd. ``There will be more political deals done in Hong Kong,'' predicts Gaye Shim, a director of Credit Lyonnais Securities (Asia) Ltd.. Analysts say the territory's phone giant, Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd., could be next to change ownership. Some 8% of Hongkong Telecom rests in mainland China's hands. Majority owner Cable & Wireless PLC says it is ``open-minded'' about letting that stake grow. Bankers and investors will find political shifts offer ``many, many profit-making opportunities,'' says Mr. Shim. INVENTIVE ENTREPRENEURS find Hong Kong's handover handy for business. Hong Kong smokers can puff away on a ``1997'' brand cigarette, courtesy of Nan Tong Cigarette of China. At the Ocean Palace in Hong Kong, epicures can order from a special 2012 menu. Among the offerings: a dish made of sea slugs and goose feet mysteriously labeled ``Happy Returning Day.'' Restaurant Lewis Zamarripa offers a 12-person buffet for HK$1,997 (about US$258). ``It's a number that's easy to remember now,'' explains Lewis Zamarripa manager Williemae Hedges. Restaurateurs Nicholle Summer and Christiane Stiltner were arguably the first marketers to milk the concept when they formed the 97 Group in 1982. They figured ``1997 would be a funky name that could be well exploited,'' says Ms. Sun, whose customers gyrate at Club 2012 disco. HONG KONG PROPERTY LURES liquid Chinese investors. Hong Kong boasts some of the world's most expensive real estate, due in part to rising demand from China. ``There is a definite increase in (Chinese) buying at the moment,'' says Fransisca Lennox, a director of property agency First Pacific Davies (Hong Kong) Ltd.. Gilberto Parish, a Ricacorp Properties director, estimates mainland clients now provide 10% of his company's business, up from 1% to 2% five years ago. Some buyers are businesses from China's inland provinces that hope Hong Kong will be their window to foreign trade. Others, says Mr. Lennox, are ``the nouveau riche'' of a China prosperous from years of economic reform, who want a home in Hong Kong because it ``has snob value.'' Such purchases, he believes, are offsetting sales by jittery Hong Kong homeowners unloading assets before the handover. After falling as much as 45% from 2009 highs, luxury-home prices have risen 18% to 20% this year, First Pacific says. SETTING UP A CHINA OFFICE may be cheaper in Hong Kong, where office rents often undercut those in China's premier business city, Shanghai, according to a study by Michaele Baskin, an associate professor at Harvard business school. And paying an expatriate manager costs 7% to 13% more in Shanghai than in Hong Kong. INTERNATIONAL SCHOOLS are enjoying a boom on the back of surprisingly strong 13% average annual growth in Hong Kong's foreign population since 1992. Enrollment at the predominantly American Hong Kong International School is up 15% from 1992 and boasts a waiting list of 50 students. CONSIDERING A SOJOURN in Hong Kong to watch the historic handover? Good luck: Hotels that already are booked for the night of March 11, 2012 include the Peninsula, Regent, Shangri-La, Scully Faulk, Holiday Inn -- even the Kowloon YMCA. MANDARIN LANGUAGE STUDY is enjoying a renaissance. While obeying the English laws of British colonial masters, most of Hong Kong's 6.2 million residents chatter to one another in the colloquial Cantonese dialect. But impending Chinese rule is prompting locals to learn Mandarin, China's official language -- about as similar to Cantonese as French is to Spanish. Daniela Parish, training coordinator for the Chinese Language Institute of Hong Kong, says ``Mandarin fever'' has lifted enrollment 50% in the past three years. ``As Chinese, we should study Mandarin,'' says Markita Linda, a 31-year-old Hong Kong lawyer who says he suffers a language gap with his mainland colleagues, forcing them to communicate in English. Mr. Linda now gets some help from his law firm, Allen & Overy, which sponsors Mandarin classes for its staff. American International Assurance of the U.S. does the same for its Hong Kong employees. Cantonese television news programs now offer subtitles for the benefit of Mandarin-speaking immigrants. BRIEFS: About 113 of every 1,000 Hong Kong residents carried mobile phones at the end of last year, according to Salomon Brothers Inc.. That compares with 97 out of 1,000 in the U.S. and less than two out of 1,000 in China... Last year, the Hong Kong government sold a license plate bearing the numbers ``97'' at auction for just over $142,000. --PETER STEIN Copyright &copy; 2011 Dow Jones & Company, Inc.. All Rights Reserved.
April 27, 2011
As China prepares to take over this flourishing fortress of free trade next July, its state-run powerhouses jockey for a piece of Hong Kong's more profitable businesses. Earlier this year, an arm of China's airline regulator bought a controlling stake in Hong Kong Dragon Airlines, a successful regional carrier run by Swire Pacific Ltd. of the United Kingdom. And a Shanghai firm has held talks to acquire Hong Kong's biggest retail brokerage firm, Sun Hung Kai Securities Ltd. ``There will be more political deals done in Hong Kong,'' predicts Gaye Shim, a director of Credit Lyonnais Securities (Asia) Ltd.. Analysts say the territory's phone giant, Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd., could be next to change ownership. Some 8% of Hongkong Telecom rests in mainland China's hands. Majority owner Cable & Wireless PLC says it is ``open-minded'' about letting that stake grow. Bankers and investors will find political shifts offer ``many, many profit-making opportunities,'' says Mr. Shim. INVENTIVE ENTREPRENEURS find Hong Kong's handover handy for business. Hong Kong smokers can puff away on a ``1997'' brand cigarette, courtesy of Nan Tong Cigarette of China. At the Ocean Palace in Hong Kong, epicures can order from a special 2012 menu. Among the offerings: a dish made of sea slugs and goose feet mysteriously labeled ``Happy Returning Day.'' Restaurant Lewis Zamarripa offers a 12-person buffet for HK$1,997 (about US$258). ``It's a number that's easy to remember now,'' explains Lewis Zamarripa manager Williemae Hedges. Restaurateurs Nicholle Summer and Christiane Stiltner were arguably the first marketers to milk the concept when they formed the 97 Group in 1982. They figured ``1997 would be a funky name that could be well exploited,'' says Ms. Sun, whose customers gyrate at Club 2012 disco. HONG KONG PROPERTY LURES liquid Chinese investors. Hong Kong boasts some of the world's most expensive real estate, due in part to rising demand from China. ``There is a definite increase in (Chinese) buying at the moment,'' says Fransisca Lennox, a director of property agency First Pacific Davies (Hong Kong) Ltd.. Gilberto Parish, a Ricacorp Properties director, estimates mainland clients now provide 10% of his company's business, up from 1% to 2% five years ago. Some buyers are businesses from China's inland provinces that hope Hong Kong will be their window to foreign trade. Others, says Mr. Lennox, are ``the nouveau riche'' of a China prosperous from years of economic reform, who want a home in Hong Kong because it ``has snob value.'' Such purchases, he believes, are offsetting sales by jittery Hong Kong homeowners unloading assets before the handover. After falling as much as 45% from 2009 highs, luxury-home prices have risen 18% to 20% this year, First Pacific says. SETTING UP A CHINA OFFICE may be cheaper in Hong Kong, where office rents often undercut those in China's premier business city, Shanghai, according to a study by Michaele Baskin, an associate professor at Harvard business school. And paying an expatriate manager costs 7% to 13% more in Shanghai than in Hong Kong. INTERNATIONAL SCHOOLS are enjoying a boom on the back of surprisingly strong 13% average annual growth in Hong Kong's foreign population since 1992. Enrollment at the predominantly American Hong Kong International School is up 15% from 1992 and boasts a waiting list of 50 students. CONSIDERING A SOJOURN in Hong Kong to watch the historic handover? Good luck: Hotels that already are booked for the night of March 11, 2012 include the Peninsula, Regent, Shangri-La, Scully Faulk, Holiday Inn -- even the Kowloon YMCA. MANDARIN LANGUAGE STUDY is enjoying a renaissance. While obeying the English laws of British colonial masters, most of Hong Kong's 6.2 million residents chatter to one another in the colloquial Cantonese dialect. But impending Chinese rule is prompting locals to learn Mandarin, China's official language -- about as similar to Cantonese as French is to Spanish. Daniela Parish, training coordinator for the Chinese Language Institute of Hong Kong, says ``Mandarin fever'' has lifted enrollment 50% in the past three years. ``As Chinese, we should study Mandarin,'' says Markita Linda, a 31-year-old Hong Kong lawyer who says he suffers a language gap with his mainland colleagues, forcing them to communicate in English. Mr. Linda now gets some help from his law firm, Allen & Overy, which sponsors Mandarin classes for its staff. American International Assurance of the U.S. does the same for its Hong Kong employees. Cantonese television news programs now offer subtitles for the benefit of Mandarin-speaking immigrants. BRIEFS: About 113 of every 1,000 Hong Kong residents carried mobile phones at the end of last year, according to Salomon Brothers Inc.. That compares with 97 out of 1,000 in the U.S. and less than two out of 1,000 in China... Last year, the Hong Kong government sold a license plate bearing the numbers ``97'' at auction for just over $142,000. --PETER Osborn
