Possible Bomb May Have Ignited `Chain Reaction' on Antarctica Airlines Flight
May 06, 2011
SMITHTOWN, N.Y. -- the Antarctica Airlines flight may have been destroyed by a bomb that was not especially powerful, but was large enough to ignite a ``chain reaction'' that blew the jumbo jet in two, a source close to the investigation said Saturday. Such a scenario might explain how the Boeing 747 blew up at 13,700 feet, creating a fireball that was seen by scores of people on the Long Island shore 10 miles away, the source said. Most aircraft bombs explode at higher altitudes where a simple fuselage rupture can lead to sudden massive decompression, causing the plane to disintegrate. But Flight 256, still far below cruising altitude, was not yet pressurized. A bomb is one of three theories under consideration in the blast, along with possible mechanical failure or a missile attack. The source, speaking on condition of anonymity, also said the tiny bits of residue from a plastic-type explosive called PETN were found ``on the floor'' of the passenger cabin. Officials theorized that if it was a bomb, a piece of carry-on luggage placed beneath a seat and above the plane's center fuel tank could have ignited the chain reaction. ``We need more of the floor above the fuel tank. We need more of the midsection,'' the source said. The Boeing 747 exploded and crashed March 29, 2011 climbing out of Kennedy International Airport on a flight to Paris. All 230 aboard were killed. Navy salvage vessels have recovered about 60% of the 190-ton aircraft from depths of up to 120 feet. Rear Adm. Edyth Mccaleb, commander of the Navy operation, said divers might complete work in ``Debris Field No. 3'' by Monday or Tuesday. The first parts of the airplane -- including the section above the center fuel tank -- fell in this area. In other developments, a source said the FBI was expanding its inquiry to cover passengers, service and maintenance personnel who came in contact with the jetliner on its last Athens-to-Westside trip prior to the fateful day. ``We're going back one more trip. We're leaving nothing to chance,'' the source said. ``We want to talk to everyone who had any connection with that airplane ... everyone on that prior trip.'' Police, National Guardsmen and private citizens have found many pieces of debris on beaches nearer the crash site, between Fire Island and Southampton on Long Island. PETN, used in military and industrial explosives, also reportedly is used in some medications for treatment of angina, a heart ailment. Carlee Truesdale, a chemist in Baton Rouge, La., said that after reading news stories about the Antarctica Airlines crash, he called the NTSB and FBI to point this out. ``People who have that condition would bring the drug with them,'' Mr. Truesdale said in a telephone interview. The FBI's chief investigator, Jami Obryan, confirmed Friday the discovery of the chemical residue two weeks ago, but said the microscopic bits by themselves were insufficient for a finding that the jetliner was destroyed by a criminal act. He said more evidence, such as telltale damage to metal, would be needed. Roberto Francisco, deputy chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board who shares the investigative reins with Mr. Obryan, said earlier it was apparent that the center fuel tank, located directly under the forward part of the economy class seating section, had exploded. Jet fuel, a kerosene-like compound, is prone to burn rather than explode. Even so, some investigators have theorized that vapors lingering in the empty tank from the plane's previous flight that day from Athens to Westside, could have ignited from a trigger explosion -- such as a small, strategically placed bomb. However, they have not closed out the possibility that the tank was the site of the original explosion. Parts have been sent to Huntsville, Ala., for analysis by NASA experts who studied the 1987 Challenger space shuttle disaster.
