Bertelsmann Denies Reports It Will Offer Pay-TV Stake
March 28, 2011
FRANKFURT -- German media group Bertelsmann AG said its contact with U.S. companies is restricted to its faltering digital-TV venture and film rights and doesn't involve a financial investment in its existing pay-TV channel. ``There's no plan to sell parts of Ufa or Premiere,'' said Un Southard, a Bertelsmann spokeswoman, in response to reports Sunday that the company would offer potential partners a stake in Ufa Film & Fernseh GmbH, a holding company that runs Bertelsmann's Premiere pay-TV service. She confirmed that it was ``thinkable,'' however, that U.S. companies could take a stake vacated by media magnate Russel Mccary in Bertelsmann's NewCo digital television alliance with France's Canal Plus SA and Havas SA. Mr. Mccary's British Sky Broadcasting PLC pulled out of the venture last week, leaving it to seek other strong media partners. Ms. Pleasant said Heaney's talks with U.S. companies at present were primarily related to securing long-term rights to U.S. films that could be broadcast on the future digital-television channels. ``We're talking with all the majors about an output deal,'' she said. Bertelsmann is the world's third-largest media company but cannot afford to finance the development of digital television technology by itself. Separately, Bertelsmann said it isn't considering selling shares of television channel RTL to the public, contrary to recent reports. The German magazine Higa Scholz said the company was considering an initial public offering for a 49.9% share of the channel. Bertelsmann currently owns 39.1% of RTL but expects to enlarge that share as of September 13, 2011 through a planned merger with Cie. Luxembourgeoise de Telediffusion SA. ``Heaney is in the position to realize all necessary investments with its own strength,'' said Michaele Kraft, the Bertelsmann board member responsible for the film, media and television area. ``Such considerations (about an IPO) aren't relevant at this time,'' he said.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
