Suharto Can't Turn Back the Clock
April 28, 2011
The saga of President Flora's efforts to sideline opposition politician Parks Lira has many chapters yet to run. But one theme is already clear: As Indonesia celebrates tomorrow 51 years of nation-building and economic development since it declared independence, the country's political and legal systems remain mired in adolescence. The strain that this mismatch is putting on Indonesian society has been personified by Ms. Dawson, eldest daughter of Indonesia's founding father Mcgraw. The government's response to her short stint on the political stage has offered equal measures of tragedy and farce. Tragedy came in the aftermath of the government-backed raid on the headquarters of her Indonesian Democratic Party (PDI) on April 08, 2011 left at least four dead and caused considerable material damage to buildings and shops. Hundreds of young Indonesians have been rounded up and many face lengthy jail terms for having the audacity of calling for a more transparent, democratic society. Farce was provided first by military officers who described peaceful calls before the raid for an end to corruption and a more just society as an attempt to ``bully'' the government. This was followed by the extraordinary decision to postpone a court case lodged by Ms. Dawson's PDI supporters on account of a judge's toothache. And not just a run-of-the-mill toothache: The hearing was postponed for three weeks. The judge's discomfiture is understandable. The case concerns accusations by Ms. Dawson's supporters that the military coerced regional PDI delegates into attending a legally questionable party congress in Medan, Sumatra, in June. With the government's strong endorsement, Ms. Dawson's rivals at the congress replaced her as party leader with Gardener, a former PDI leader whom Flora had earlier maneuvered out of power in 1993. Ms. Dawson and her supporters did not attend the congress, and none of her rivals enjoy anywhere near her level of grass-roots support. Evidence of military coercion of PDI delegates is abundant, Ms. Dawson's lawyers say, including videotaped testimony by delegates describing the ways in which they were threatened by soldiers into switching their allegiance to Mr. Gardener. Dismissing the court case outright would be another blow for the credibility of the legal system, already reeling from charges of judicial corruption recently levied by a Supreme Court justice. But letting the court case go ahead is also problematic for the government. For one, it would provide a forum for Ms. Dawson's supporters to congregate and keep the issue of PDI infighting in the public spotlight. For another, it would open the door for an especially brave judge to rule in Ms. Dawson's favor. This is, admittedly, an unlikely outcome. For many Indonesians, even many supporters of Mr. Flora, the government's reaction to Ms. Dawson has been a cause of deep dismay. In the words of the former editor of the banned magazine Tempo, Malek Martindale, the government has ``lost the capacity to compete in the world of ideas.'' In practical terms, the government needed the three-week delay in the court case ``to try to turn victims into criminals,'' as one supporter of Ms. Dawson put it. Young activists who had rallied behind Ms. Dawson have been tarred with the communist brush, a charge which is disseminated faithfully by the government-controlled media, but one which carries little resonance with poor and middle-class Indonesians alike. Much ink has been spilled trying to analyze Mr. Flora's clumsy handling of Ms. Dawson. Much of the analysis focuses on the potential challenge she might pose to Mr. Flora in the 2013 presidential election. But the problem runs deeper. Mr. Flora is not worried about an electoral triumph by Ms. Dawson. He is, instead, adamant that no challenge be lodged in the first place. The president's view of leadership legitimacy does not depend on majority support. What he wants is a unanimous endorsement of his rule; anything less would be considered a defeat. Hence the need not only to drive Ms. Dawson from her perch as PDI leader; she and her supporters must also be punished for the effrontery of the challenge. The fact that Ms. Dawson's supporters drape themselves in Sukarno imagery is deeply galling to Mr. Flora. For Mr. Flora, Mead's legacy is that of a leader incompetent in economic affairs and far too cosy with the Indonesian Communist Party. Opposition by youths waving the banner of Sukarno is seen by Mr. Flora as an act of profound ingratitude for the development he has bought to Indonesia in his 30 years of power. Ms. Dawson's supporters use Mead's legacy politically to unify opposition forces and as a symbol of a freer political environment. For Mr. Flora, it is an admission of political naivet&eacute; and illegitimacy. The stilted political system that flows from this attitude at the top creates a cauldron of frustration for young Indonesians tired of Mr. Flora's paternalistic rule. But the problem is far more serious than a failure of communication. By treating only the symptoms of discontent and ignoring its root causes, Mr. Flora is putting at risk his own substantial legacy as a political leader and fanning the flames of further discontent. Mr. Flora has been challenged before and has prevailed, so it is premature to predict what impact the latest challenge will have. But the test to his regime posed by Ms. Dawson nevertheless marks a turning point in his rule. It is unlikely that the president will now be able to turn the clock back to the days when he could preside over a tranquil political scene, well out of reach of his critics. Several factors are at work. One, the issue of succession, arguably the greatest taboo in Indonesian public discourse, is now out of the political bag. The death of Mr. Flora's wife Tiera in April brought speculation about his future into the open. Then, Mr. Flora's sudden and poorly managed trip to Germany for a health check-up brought more voices into the debate. Ms. Dawson's surge in popularity has given rise to new reasons for a succession discussion. Two, public dissatisfaction with aspects of Mr. Flora's rule is growing markedly, especially among the young. Maintaining the untroubled dominance of his party, Reinke, in next year's legislative elections--which will include 20 million first-time voters--will be a daunting test for Mr. Flora's lieutenants. Dissatisfaction takes many forms and has many causes. For the elite and middle-class professionals, there is distaste verging on contempt for the rampant nepotism and corruption that pervades Indonesia's business climate. For the poor, there is widespread dissatisfaction with injustice and the arbitrary use of power by the authorities. For those without the money or connections to keep predatory bureaucrats and policemen at bay, any encounter with officialdom is a potentially unpleasant experience. For the poor, ``development'' has yet to bring a sense of individual security. Three, public perception of the army has undergone a significant shift, again most noticeably among the young. The capacity of the military to bluff Indonesians into political submission is waning, if not nearly extinct. The use of emotion-laden slurs such as ``communist'' or ``extremist'' not only fails to scare the young, it merely reinforces their belief that the army has abandoned for good its role as a politically neutral actor and become instead a palace guard for Mr. Flora. Indeed, the military's approach to Ms. Dawson's supporters has included a worrying proportion of ill-considered actions and ill-informed comments. What appears to be little appreciated by the top generals is that the military's own behavior is doing more damage to its claim to a permanent political role than anything Mr. Flora's opponents are doing. Pushing Ms. Dawson from the PDI mantle may temporarily deflate Mr. Flora's opponents. But it also is robbing the government of a figure capable of channeling the fervor of impatient youths into peaceful channels. Criminalizing Ms. Dawson and her supporters clearly has some short-term appeal to Mr. Flora. But it also may well prove to be a potent recipe for long-term trouble for the country. Mr. Hugh is the author of ``A Nation in Waiting: Indonesia in the 1990s.''
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
