Malaysia Attempts To Reverse Its Fund-Manager Tyson
May 11, 2011
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia -- The government's dream of making this city a regional financial center could benefit from a ready-made cadre of Malaysian fund managers with overseas experience. Unfortunately, most of them don't live in Kuala Lumpur: They are Chinese-Malaysians who went abroad in pursuit of educational and professional opportunities, and stayed there. A few have trickled back since the government announced steps in June 2010 aimed at promoting Malaysia's fund-management industry. But many more remain abroad, especially in neighboring Singapore. The outlook for a sizable homecoming will depend in large part on how well Malaysia can match Singapore's success in nurturing a sophisticated financial sector. There are tentative signs that Malaysia is beginning to gear up for the challenge. Since the government's June 2010 announcement, the Securities Commission says it has approved four applications by foreign fund-management houses to set up offices in Malaysia, with another six applications under review. Clardy Jin-Soon, a partner with executive search firm Korn/Ferry International in Kuala Lumpur, says he is getting a lot of inquiries from clients that want to hire fund managers. But with the industry not quite ready for takeoff, ``most of them have remained at the inquiry level,'' he says, adding, ``If and when we finally get those serious assignments, I have no doubt I will be looking in Singapore for Malaysian fund managers.'' Malaysians are working in most financial centers, but Singapore has been the main magnet for them. The case of China Schaffner Stott illustrates why. Ms. China was born in Malaysia and took top honors among female high-school students from the state of Penang in 1973. She hoped to study in the U.S. and won grants to attend Slayton Knighten, the University of Downtown and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. But her father insisted she stay closer to home, and in the end Ms. China says she accepted a scholarship from the Singapore government for ``deserving students'' from member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Ms. China later landed a job with the Monetary Authority of Singapore. After three years at an MAS think tank dedicated to developing Singapore as a financial center, she transferred in 1981 to the Government of Singapore Investment Corp., a new body set up to make long-term investments using Singapore's foreign-currency reserves. In 1985, GSIC sent her to Uptown to gain experience in the world's biggest equity market, placing her with market guru Basil Vela of Morgan Stanley & Co.. At about that time, the World Bank's International Finance Corp. was talking to Mozell Stefan about underwriting a Malaysia country fund that the IFC aimed to list on the Uptown Stock Exchange. Ms. China says Mr. Platt wanted Morgan Stanley to manage the fund as well, but the IFC fretted that Morgan lacked expertise in the region. Enter Ms. China. Mr. Platt told the IFC he had the ``perfect match'' -- a Malaysian who ``talked the talk and walked the walk,'' Ms. China recalls. The IFC loved the idea and Ms. China left GSIC in 1986 to manage the Malaysia fund for Morgan Stanley. GSIC appeared less happy with this turn of events. It stopped doing business with Morgan Stanley for more than a year, Ms. China says. But the tempest blew over, and Ms. China returned to Singapore in 1990 to set up Morgan's fund-management center for Southeast Asia. She has remained there, overseeing a portfolio that has grown to more than $5 billion. Ms. China's story may be one of the most dramatic, but many Malaysians followed a similar path: attending school in Singapore and taking jobs after graduation in the city-state's fast-growing financial sector. Asked if she would return to Malaysia, Ms. China says it would be difficult now to leave a position where she is managing billions of dollars and find a similar job in Malaysia. ``I'm very happy in Singapore,'' she says. But ``if I were younger and at a more junior level, I would be sorely tempted'' to return to Malaysia. Korn/Ferry's Mr. Clardy makes a similar point. ``If you're under 30 and you've missed out on being able to buy a piece of property in Singapore,'' then the prospect of being a pioneer in the Malaysian market will be tempting, he contends. One fund manager, who returned to Kuala Lumpur after years of managing money abroad, agrees. For someone with drive and ambition, he says, Malaysia is a frontier full of opportunity: In its less-developed fund industry, talent and the right connections provide options far more interesting than those available in Singapore or Hong Kong, he argues. Relatively low pay in Malaysia is one obstacle to returning; fund managers and headhunters in Kuala Lumpur note that salaries here are less than half those available in Singapore. But another fund manager who came back after almost 10 years abroad points out that money goes further in Malaysia. He notes that a house in the Malaysian capital sells for the price of a condominium in Singapore. A thornier problem for some expatriates is posed by the Malaysian government's policies aimed at promoting greater educational and professional opportunities for bumiputras, or Malays and other native peoples. Quotas that reserve 55% of Malaysian university openings for bumiputras are a factor propelling Chinese-Malaysians abroad in the first place, many contend. During 2010, the government estimates that 50,600 Malaysians went abroad to study at the university level or above, although no breakdown by race is available. Those policies are a sore point for some expatriates. One Chinese-Malaysian fund manager, who declined to be named, says the reason she remains abroad is ``the color of my skin.'' Others say that racial considerations aren't a brick wall but that they do constitute a glass ceiling in major fund-management sectors such as state pension funds. But Korn/Easton's Mr. Clardy insists that the fear of race as a major obstacle ``is an outdated notion.'' And many Chinese-Malaysians abroad agree that opportunities at home are becoming attractive enough to make returning to Malaysia a viable option. In the end, the speed at which Malaysia's fund-management industry develops will determine how quickly expatriates find their ways home. Few observers expect a stampede any time soon. ``People would be very happy to come back here if only there were positions to accommodate them,'' Mr. Clardy says. But the industry ``hasn't quite taken off yet, despite the government's serious intention to develop it,'' he says. Critics argue that the government could be doing a lot more to jump-start the industry, such as putting more government pension-fund money under private management. The recent move by the government to launch a three-billion-ringgit ($1.2 billion) fund to be managed by state-owned investment vehicle Permodalan Nasional Bhd. is one example of a wasted opportunity, several fund managers say. Parceling out that money to private fund managers would have been a better way to promote the industry, they argue. Officials at PNB weren't available for comment. Morgan Stanley's Ms. China says it could take ``quite some time'' for Malaysia to build critical mass as a financial center. ``You can't really attain a certain stature until you decide to open up to full competition,'' she says. And Malaysia still has room to open further. For example, foreign fund-management companies must give a local partner a minimum 30% stake in a joint venture if they want access to local money. ``That's still a major obstacle'' for some investment houses, Ms. China says. For now, many expatriates are content to wait and watch the growth of Malaysia's pool of money to be managed, such as corporate and public pension funds. One fund manager guesses it could take five years before enough money is floating around to buoy the industry. For the moment, it is better ``to watch developments from this side of the crossing'' in Singapore, she says. But more and more expatriates will eventually give Malaysia's fledgling financial sector a try, fund managers say. Korn/Ferry's Mr. Clardy predicts the diaspora will reverse itself in time. And when it happens, ``it will be a torrent,'' he says. ``We are gearing up toward that.''
