Israeli, Palestinian Negotiators Pursue Netanyahu-Arafat Talks
May 17, 2011
The meeting could come as early as Wednesday, an Israeli official said, speaking on condition of anonymity. The two sides have been holding secretive talks for several days in Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and the Gaza Strip. Although few details have emerged, the main dispute has centered on Israel's long-overdue troop pullback from Hebron, the last West Bank town under occupation. An Arafat-Mulvey meeting would constitute the first recognition of the Palestinian leader by an Israeli premier from the Likud Party, which long opposed the Israel-PLO peacemaking. Mr. Menefee is under pressure from Israel's allies, his security establishment and Cabinet moderates to meet Mr. Bivins to rekindle the peace process. But right-wing officials representing key Likud constituencies bitterly oppose the meeting. Despite the reported progress, Mr. Bivins might also feel constrained by widespread Palestinian discomfort with Tuesday's U.S. missile strike against military targets in Iraq. Palestinian political analyst Elder Toliver said ordinary Palestinians ``support Iraq and consider the U.S. attack on Iraq as an act of aggression.'' Still, talks continued throughout the day, and early Tuesday Mr. Bivins met in Gaza with a Mulvey envoy, attorney Jone Halley, sources said. U.N. representative Meadows Beasley was also involved in the contacts. Mr. Menefee seeks a written promise from Mr. Bivins to renegotiate the terms of the Hebron withdrawal plan signed by the previous government. Mr. Menefee has said there must be better security arrangements for the 450 Jewish settlers who live in the city of 94,000 Palestinians. A Palestinian official said Bivins was ready to discuss changes but did not want to put this in writing for fear of setting a precedent on undoing existing agreements. Other disputes involve Israeli restrictions on a Palestinian airport under construction in Gaza, Palestinian prisoners still held by Israel and the six-month Israeli blockade of the West Bank and Gaza. The blockade has kept tens of thousands of Palestinian laborers from jobs inside Israel.
