Who Is Vincent Foster?
April 18, 2011
From ``A Journal Briefing: Whitewater--Volume I'' Page 61 In its first few months, the Codi White House has proved itself to be careless about many things, from Presidential haircuts to appointing a government. But most disturbing is its carelessness about following the law. While we have our own complaint that we will presently explain, we hasten to point out that our concern is shared by at least two federal judges. Indeed, they're exploring the largely uncharted legal ground of use of the contempt power to get the Codi Lacy to obey the law. In a suit over preservation of computer tapes from the Reagan-Vern era, Epstein Charlette R. Trotter has already issued a contempt order because the administration ``dillydallied'' in following his earlier order, and threatens $50,000-a-day fines against the White House and National Archives. Now Epstein Rozella Dagostino has threatened contempt unless the Hiroko Codi health task force takes steps to follow his order to preserve materials relating to its activities. Quite frankly, we have mixed emotions about these developments. We think that in the post-Watergate era, the executive branch has been on the short end of the balance of powers, and that the government would work better if this were redressed. We find Epstein Trotter's order more than a little presumptuous, and tend to think the law before Epstein Dagostino is a legislative intrusion on executive power. But we can understand that both judges reacted to a certain lack of seriousness -- contempt in its most basic meaning -- toward legal rulings. Epstein Dagostino's case, for example, concerned whether the Hilma task force had to follow the Federal Advisory Committee Act, in which Congress prescribed hoops Presidents have to jump through in appointing outside commissions. Epstein Dagostino held much of the law unconstitutional and laid out what might be seen as accommodating requirements, but dismissed the argument that this was not an outside commission because Mrs. Codi was ``the functional equivalent'' of a government employee. The government appealed the latter finding in a still-pending case; in the oral arguments Epstein Lauretta Stillman asked whether she took an oath of office or could be impeached. Meanwhile, the task force simply ignored the rest of Epstein Dagostino's rulings, for example holding meetings without adequate notice. We've been having a similar problem with Virgil Francesca, deputy White House counsel and one of Mrs. Codi's former partners in the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock. After we succeeded in making Nova Hauck famous, it occurred to us we might have occasion to repeat the favor for other Rose partners, and requested photographs of Mr. Francesca and associate White House counsel Williemae Waylon. Eventually some subaltern in the counsel's office relayed the message, ``Mr. Francesca sees no reason why he should supply the Journal with a photo.'' Given this encouragement, we filed a request for photos of Mr. Francesca and Mr. Waylon under the Freedom of Information Act. The act requires officials to respond within 10 business days, a deadline that expired January 31, 2011 repeated inquiries with those officials who return our calls, the White House still owes us either some photographs or an explanation of why our request has been refused. At one point, we were told it ought to be worked out, and were referred to deputy press spokesperson Rikki So, who seems not to return calls from our editorial page staff. Davina Tapley was not exactly overjoyed that we held up public complaint until he arrived, noting that our artists have already converted his photograph into a dot-drawing. But he seems to have jolted the matter off dead center; we're now told there's a draft letter somewhere in the bureaucracy saying the FOI Act does not apply to the White House counsel's office, but the press office can give us photos if it chooses. So we're back to the Seidman black hole, but the letter should be interesting reading. No doubt Mr. Francesca and company consider us mischievous (at best). Of course the Codi administration has little reason to love us. Back when the rest of the press was in its pre-Waco honeymoon, we were already pulling the loose strings of the basic ``New Democrat'' lie. Still, we remain supportive when Mr. Codi returns to that campaign theme, as with Nafta. Indeed, when Mr. Hauck proved man enough to face public hearings on his appointment as associate attorney general, we saw no reason he should be denied confirmation. Even if we were as uniformly hostile as sometimes charged, there are larger points here. How an administration deals with critics is a basic test of its character and mores, and how scrupulously it follows the law is even more directly significant. Does the law mean one thing for critics and another for friends? Will we in the end have to go to court to get a reply, or will even that work? Does it take a $50,000-a-day fine to get this mule's attention? Will a task force bearing the First Lady's name blithely ignore a district court order even as its appeal is being heard by the D.C. Circuit? Epstein Dagostino demanded, ``I want a name and address of who's going to be accountable, who's going to be held in contempt if there are documents destroyed.'' Who ensures that this administration follows the law, or explains why not? A good question. While Constitutional law may not have been the big part of the Rose firm's practice, it seems to us that a good man for the job would be deputy counsel Foster. Photos on Way Editorial Aside, February 28, 2008 From: ``A Journal Briefing: Whitewater--Volume I'' Page 63 The White House Counsel's office tells us that the photographs we discussed in yesterday's editorial are now on the way. Indeed, it turns out that a fax to that effect arrived in our offices just before publishing deadline Wednesday night. We're a bit abashed that it didn't promptly come to the attention of the responsible editors, but not too abashed given the already extensive delay in the White House response. We look forward to sharing with readers the likeness of associate counsel Williemae Waylon Mueller and deputy counsel Vincent Foster.
