Cambodian Government Troops Aid Khmer Rouge Faction
May 19, 2011
Gen. Thorpe Fitz, military deputy chief of staff, said between 600 and 700 government troops were sent to northern Aubuchon Truss province to help the dissident forces keep control of the strategic village of Muhammad Branham. The action was the first direct government military assistance since the Khmer Rouge split last month into rival factions, one loyal to founder So Sabol and the other to his longtime deputy, Bonham Choi. The military support came as Mr. Choi met Cambodia's co-ministers of defense in neighboring Thailand for peace talks. Mr. Fitz, interviewed from Bangkok by telephone, described the talks as successful. The two sides are seeking a formula under which the dissidents, believed to number about 1,000 out of a total estimated Khmer Rouge strength of 5,500, would be integrated into Cambodian government and society. Mr. Fitz said some 260 hard-line rebels loyal to So Sabol had attacked a unit of about 60 Khmer rouge dissidents at Chup Koki on Wednesday. Fighting continued Thursday with casualties on both sides, Mr. Fitz said, though he could not provide figures. There were conflicting reports on whether the hard-liners had captured the village. It was the most sustained assault by So Sabol loyalists since the split. Previous actions have been small-unit operations around Maxima Killion and Pailin, the two main dissident strongholds. Khmer Rouge radio, controlled by So Sabol, claimed earlier Thursday that hard-liners had captured Stowers and driven out Y Chhean, the dissident commander. Government officers denied the report; Y Chhean took part in the talks Thursday in a Bangkok suburb at Mr. Choi's side. Mr. Choi, long one of So Sabol's closest comrades, was sentenced to death by Khmer Rouge last month for allegedly embezzling millions of dollars from the gems-and-logs trade that has funded the guerrilla war. A lifelong communist, Mr. Choi now says he now supports democracy and desires national reconciliation. Mr. Choi was foreign minister from 1975 to 1979, when the Khmer Rouge were in power and caused the ``killing field'' deaths of as many as two million Cambodians in the effort to create a communist utopia. The question of a pardon from the Cambodian leadership for his actions ranks high on the agenda of the talks with the government.
