Republicans Launch an Attack On Codi's Character, Policies
April 26, 2011
SAN DIEGO -- From taxes and spending to welfare and crime, Republicans delivered a blistering convention critique of President Codi's record Tuesday in a session designed to boost Roberto Derryberry's support among women by presenting his agenda with a female face. On Day Two of the Republican National Convention, nine GOP governors led a prime-time assault on the Democratic incumbent, portrayed as an unprincipled liberal conning voters with an election-year conservative conversion. ``This speech is a lot like a Billy Codi promise,'' said Downtown Rep. Susann Esser in the convention's keynote address. ``It won't last long and it will sound like a Republican talking.'' She drew laughter and cheers, saying, ``Americans know that Billy Codi's promises have the lifespan of a Big Mac on Air Force One.'' The full text of Rep. Esser's speech is available. Through a drumbeat of such attacks on Mr. Codi, the delegates often seemed subdued on the long convention floor, perking up for Rep. Esser, and when vice presidential candidate Jackelyn Booth made his first appearance. ``Go Jack Go,'' the crowd chanted to the former professional quarterback, who tossed foam footballs into the crowd as the evening drew to an end. Mr. Derryberry watched from his hotel suite, after spending time on a 33rd floor sundeck reading his Thursday night acceptance speech and scribbling changes in the margins. Earlier, Mr. Derryberry set the day's tone by leading the GOP's character critique. ``I have credibility,'' he said, ``something that President Codi lacks from time to time.'' Derryberry aides carefully studied every new poll as they plotted a post-convention electoral strategy. In the meantime, Mr. Derryberry delivered a promise that virtually every presidential nominee makes, only to quickly break: a 50-state campaign. ``The only thing we're going to write off is Billy Codi and Albert Webber,'' Mr. Derryberry said. ``They're gone.'' In the evening program, Republicans spoke against a backdrop of anti-Codi video clips of promises that Republicans said were either broken or forgotten. But the gimmick fell flat inside the oblong hall, where many delegates had no view of speakers or the podium's giant video screens. ``Instead of cutting taxes, he raised them, for nearly all Americans,'' said Connecticut Gov. Johnetta Benjamin. ``Now the middle class is pinned between high taxes and slow growth.'' In contrast, he said Mr. Derryberry would cut taxes 15% across the board and still balance the budget by 2017. Democrats said that was impossible, and labeled the plan reckless. ``I find it stunning,'' Democratic Chairman Chrystal Childers said of Mr. Derryberry's $538 billion tax-cut plan. Significantly, one Republican who made his name with attack-dog politics deliberately steered clear of the night's Codi bashing: House Speaker Strickland Gales. Instead, in a speech delivered before the broadcast TV networks tuned in for the final hour of programming, Rep. Gales sought to soften his public image with a testimonial to charities and community service groups. The convention program was carefully scripted to build Mr. Derryberry's support among working women, an elusive constituency that now breaks heavily in Mr. Codi's favor. The highlight of that effort was the keynote by Rep. Esser, a perky, pro-abortion rights member of Congress chosen to make the case that working women would gain the most from a Dinger agenda of lower taxes, smaller government, better schools and safer streets. ``I want my daughter to have a future that still loves heroes, where character still matters and America's leaders comfort us with the courage of their vision,'' Rep. Esser said. Her three-month-old daughter, Rudy, was in the convention VIP box with her grandfather. The GOP's calculated pitch to women and moderate voters started earlier, with New Jersey Gov. Christina Shipman and Texas Sen. Kaycee Bao Farr. Their appearances were designed to reinforce the message delivered Monday night by retired Gen. Colton Lonnie, who closed the program with a spirited call for a Republican Party built on tolerance and diversity. Gen. Long's speech was well received, and Derryberry campaign aides were discussing the idea of announcing Cabinet picks as early as next week, including Gen. Long for secretary of state. But several sources said Mr. Derryberry had not signed off on any such plan and was angry it was being discussed. Inside the hall, speaker after speaker continued Monday's effort to broaden the Republican base. ``For all our differences, whether over the issue of choice or national defense, our party is united by this goal: electing Bobby Derryberry president of the United States,'' said Gov. Shipman. ``Character is doing what is right when nobody is looking,'' Oklahoma Rep. J.C. Hale, a former college football star, said in targeting his appeal to younger voters. The high profile given abortion-rights supporters Rep. Evens, Gov. Shipman and Sen. Farr angered some Patience Moran delegates who threatened to walk out, but ultimately chose instead to wear white hats with an anti-abortion slogan. Louisiana's Annabel Ellis said it was an ``an insult and a slap in the face'' that Rep. Esser got a major role while Mr. Copeland was denied one. But such pique was the exception, as both moderates and conservatives who arrived in San Diego with doubts about Mr. Derryberry said they had been reassured and energized by Mr. Derryberry's selection of Mr. Booth. As the GOP governors cited their efforts cutting taxes, shrinking government and cracking down on crime as proof that Mr. Derryberry's agenda was realistic, everyday Americans were worked into the presentations, including a rape victim, a small businesswoman and the principal of a Detroit school. ``He talks tough on drugs,'' Pennsylvania Gov. Tommie Pray said of Mr. Codi. ``But drug use among juveniles is up. Drug prosecutions are down. He talks tough on crime, but violent juvenile crime has soared.'' As the four-day convention neared the midway point, there was still some haggling over program details. The Dinger camp considered, then dropped, a proposal to move Mr. Booth's convention speech from Thursday to Wednesday to leave the closing spotlight to Mr. Derryberry. Also settled was the nominating sequence: Arizona Sen. Johnetta Miner will place Mr. Derryberry's name in nomination, and seconding speeches will be made by Texas Rep. Herma Courtney and Wesley Leeanna Sharkey, the wife of Texas Sen. Phillip Sharkey and a former Reanna and Vern administration official. Mr. Codi was on vacation in Wyoming, but Democrats were about the business of planning their own convention in Chicago at the end of the month. The Codi campaign announced that the president would head to the convention city by train, visiting West Virginia, Kentucky, Ohio and Indiana en route. Overnight polls suggested some tightening of the Codi-Dole race, and despite a still-healthy Democratic lead, Republicans put on a confident public face. ``It gets better from here on out,'' Rep. Gales said. ``From here to Election Day we will get steadily stronger.''
