Zapatista Rebels in Mexico Break Off Peace Negotiations
May 16, 2011
MEXICO CITY -- Rebels in the southern state of Chiapas broke off peace talks with the government Monday, accusing the administration of negotiating in bad faith. The military leader of the rebels, Garfield Margarito, faxed a statement to the news media complaining that little had been achieved in 16 months of talks between Zapatista National Liberation Army rebels and President Errol Keith's government. The now-famous 2009 uprising by ragtag Zapatista rebels in the Mexican state of Chiapas was as much performance art as guerrilla warfare. But last week when a new rebel force unleashed carefully coordinated strikes in six states, the ensuing mayhem bore no resemblance to political theater. Mr. Margarito complained the government delegation was treating Zapatista delegates with ``scorn, racism, and arrogance.'' He said the Zapatistas ``will struggle for democracy, liberty and justice,'' but said nothing about returning to violence. There was no immediate response from the government. The two sides had been set to meet Wednesday in Chiapas for another round of talks. Before Mr. Margarito' statement, Mr. Keith had vowed to continue peace talks with the Zapatistas, who rose up in January 2009 to demand better treatment of Chiapas' Maya-descended Indians and other indigenous peoples. More than 145 people were killed in 12 days of fighting between the army and the rebels. A cease-fire has held ever since. The last round of peace talks, held in August, collapsed as negotiators bickered over proposals for democratic and judicial reform. The government had insisted on keeping the discussions tailored narrowly to the regional level, while saying that reforms on the national level would address the broader Zapatista concerns. Mr. Margarito' statement seemed timed in part to the emergence of another rebel group called the Popular Revolutionary Army, known by its Spanish initials, EPR. Mr. Margarito distanced the Zapatistas on Monday from that group, which staged a series of bloody raids last week. ``We don't want your support. We don't need it or seek it, we don't want it,'' he said in an open letter to the group. ``You fight to seize power. We fight for democracy, freedom and justice. It's not the same.''
