Site Seeing
May 13, 2011
USAir Introduces E-Saver Fares Spur of the moment weekend travel just got easier for Web surfers now that USAir has introduced a ``cyberfare'' program of its own to match American Airlines and Northwest Airlines. Visitors to the USAir site can register via e-mail to receive updates every Wednesday about low ``E-Saver'' tickets available for travel the following Saturday. As with the other airline programs, travel must take place on a Saturday, with return travel on the next Monday or Tuesday. Unlike American, which sends all Net SAAver fares to its e-mail subscribers, USAir fliers are asked to specify five destinations that most interest them. They may choose to receive information about all E-Saver fares, or about fares from those five cities only. Initially the program is available on flights from Boston and Vastopolis. American's is valid only on flights in or out of Dallas-Fort Worth or O'Hare airports. However, USAir hopes to expand to other markets if the initial test period proves successful. Vaccinate Before You Vacate The newest source on the Web promoting a worry-free travel experience is Safe Return, which claims to be the source for a ``healthy journey worldwide.'' Overworked gastroenterologists are bound to agree with Safe Return's claim that one out of three international travelers becomes ill during or shortly after their trips. Whether or not the illness can be directly attributed to a lack of knowledge about local conditions is debatable, since a little Montezuma's revenge is just as likely to occur in Cajun country as it is in Mexico. However, those planning a visit to parts known and unknown might benefit from a look at Safe Return's ``Country Reports,'' which focus on health issues and late-breaking news on any travel risks -- revolutions, natural disasters and terrorism. Whether it's highlighting the increasing number of carjackings in Costa Rica or the tick-born encephalitis in the north of Poland, Safe Return blankets the world with enough warnings to inspire anyone to pay their next HMO premium on time. Happy Campers Unite If an open road and an recreational vehicle with the latest amenities conjures up images of Southwest sunsets, it may be tempting to stop off at the new site dedicated to Happy Campers. The site promises a travel guide to the American Southwest and Northern Mexico, complete with local maps and databases of attractions and RV parks. Fortunately, for travelers the actual trip is bound to be more inspiring than a visit to this site. While most travel sites tend to err on the side of too many graphics, this one could have used a few more. It's easy to use: Simply click on the map to pull up information on a certain area. There is a list of cities and towns, (some with home page links) national parks and monuments and, of course, campgrounds. Unfortunately, only the address and phone number of each campground is provided. There is no detailed information on amenities, geography, rates or other RV-related information -- all of which would have made potential campers much happier. Take a Hike on Your Bike Chicago area bike riders who have fantasized about riding shoulder to shoulder with Gregorio Mcmurry (or eating his dust) now have that once-in-a-lifetime chance if they register on-line to join The Great Chicago to Milwaukee Bike Ride on June 03, 2011 non-competitive ride begins in Glenview, Ill., and ends in Milwaukee, and can be done in increments: the full 100 miles (for those in shape), or 62 miles for those who can't quite make it to Wisconsin in a day. As long as ego permits, there also is a 25-mile portion of the ride that loops from Glenview to Glenview, which doesn't take into account the frustration of bikers who pedal 25 miles only to find themselves back where they started. Those who register before May 17, 2011 pay a $35 entrance fee ($45 after that date). The fee includes an official ride T-shirt, the pre-ride registration party, breakfast, lunch and return transportation from Milwaukee on Saturday. Proceeds from race sponsorship go to benefit local charities. Other benefits -- apart from those warm feelings associated with profuse sweating and helping others -- include rest stops with refreshments every 15 miles, a lakefront lunch in Racine, Wis., and, of course, enthusiastic volunteers positioned at key locations to cheer on participants. Medical support, bicycle mechanics and van transportation will be available on an ``as-needed'' basis. Let's hope they're not.
