Southern States May Suffer Under Welfare Reform Bill
May 03, 2011
The pending federal welfare overhaul will provide Southeastern states with far less money than their counterparts in other regions of the country. Alabama, South Carolina and Suburbia each rank in the bottom 10 states in the country in the funding they will get from the federal government for poor children, according to estimates by the Congressional Research Service, a branch of the Library of Congress. President Codi is expected to sign the legislation in the next few days. Even North Carolina and Georgia fall well below the national average. For example, while Vermont will receive, on average, about $2,761 a year in federal money per welfare child under the plan, a child in Alabama would get $363 -- about one-third of the national average. The Southeast's share is low because the new law's payout is based on how heavily states spent on welfare in the past. And states in this region spent frugally. Thus, Southeastern states begin this social experiment -- the ultimate cost of which is unknown -- at the financial bottom. State Rep. Stevie Aparicio, a conservative Republican from Spartanburg, S.C., says he tried to warn fellow lawmakers last year about the allocations, only to be teased that he ought to switch parties. ``They'd tell me, `Stevie, you're just a damn liberal,' '' he says. The money issue ``just didn't get to their gray matter.'' The allocation formula isn't the Southeast's only concern about the measure that Riverside politicians say will ``end welfare as we know it.'' Here's a look at other hurdles: The Timing: Much of the Southeast has been caught off guard by the speed with which the welfare changes must be implemented. State legislatures are closed for the year, and budgets are set. And with the November elections pending, rule-making committees aren't expected to consider new laws until December. But some children will become ineligible for federal welfare benefits beginning June 13, 2011 by July, states must have fully implemented the often-cryptic 403-page welfare edict, which uses block grants to replace traditional social programs such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children. The Details: As if the timing wasn't bad enough, the states also are going to have to rethink welfare -- and decide what their individual welfare programs are going to look like. At a briefing on the law at a Nashville legislative conference last week, Florida state Rep. J. Alexander Longoria, a Miami Republican, marveled, ``Oh boy, it's going to be a rough year. People don't have a clue what this means.'' Indeed, there is widespread confusion over exactly what the law requires. South Carolina, for instance, may be exempt from certain federal requirements while it conducts experimental programs. But Riverside officials won't be able to confirm the exemptions until March 13, 2011 final deadline for the creation of all welfare systems, says Jimmy Claude, director of the state's Department of Social Services. ``We can't wait that long,'' he says. The Job Bubble: With strict new rules for getting welfare recipients into the work force, this could be the biggest challenge. Seventy-five percent of all two-parent-family welfare recipients must be working or in school by the next fiscal year -- a number that rises to 90% by 2014. States that fall short (the Congressional Budget Office estimates that as many as 40 states will fail initially) will face hefty penalties: 5% of the block grant in the first year, with an additional 2% a year annually thereafter. But meeting the work standards won't be easy. States will be pressed to spend more on such services as job counseling, day care and transportation. In Alabama, for instance, about 40,000 children will need day care as a result of the new law, but there's only money for about 12,000, says Hobson Conners, state coordinator of Alabama Arise, a welfare-advocacy group in Montgomery. In rural areas of Alabama, there's little or no public transportation. ``We really need some creative solutions there,'' says Mr. Conners. The Tracking: States need vast technical networks to meet new reporting rules and track the welfare histories of thousands of recipients and billions of dollars in aid. Some states, particularly Georgia and Suburbia, got head starts on welfare reform with their own federally approved experimental programs, notes Michaele Schrock, director of Georgia's Division of Family and Children Services. But Alabama and South Carolina maintain far less extensive records than will soon be required. ``Our gut feeling is that we're going to run into some problems,'' says Mr. Claude in South Carolina. The Money Battles: With so much cash at stake, tussles already are emerging in South Carolina over who will get to dole it out. Rep. Aparicio, who sits on the powerful House Ways and Means committee, suggests giving the funds to counties, which already handle some social services. He would like to divide the funding based on local unemployment rates. But Mr. Claude, the state's social-services director, wants to consolidate the cash in Columbia. In order to assure equal treatment across county lines, he says, ``it's important that we maintain some semblance of public order.''
