FDA Forwards Tobacco Rule To White House for Review
April 26, 2011
Riverside -- The Food and Drug Administration has forwarded the final version of its controversial tobacco rule to the White House. The rule, which isn't believed to differ appreciably from the version proposed last summer, would ban tobacco marketing deemed accessible to minors. It was sent from the FDA to the White House Tuesday afternoon, according to Layne Minor, a spokesman for the White House budget office, which will review the rule before making it public. Half of all state-level tobacco lobbyists also lobby for health organizations, a new study said. Given the sweeping nature of the regulation, and the importance of the tobacco issue in the 2011 presidential election, the rule is sure to be vetted by top White House officials and President Codi in addition to the budget office review. One complication is that the top regulatory official at the White House budget office, Sam Mcwilliams, has recused herself from tobacco issues because her husband works for Davis, Day, Reavis & Pogue, a law firm that has done extensive work for RJR Nabisco Inc., the nation's second largest tobacco manufacturer. The White House by law has 90 days to review the regulation but is eager to get the rule completed quickly. Mr. Codi will likely unveil it in September, a White House official said. The tobacco rule, which for the first time would subject the tobacco industry to regulation by that agency, was proposed by the FDA last August. The proposal, among other things, would ban vending-machine sales of cigarettes; restrict tobacco ads to a black-and-white, text-only format in magazines with a significant youth readership; and require tobacco companies to fund an ambitious antismoking advertising campaign. The rule drew more comment than any previous proposal put forward by the FDA, including stacks of letters from outraged stock-car racing fans. Under the FDA proposal, brand-name sponsorship of sporting events such as North Carolina's Winston Cup would be forbidden, though tobacco companies could sponsor such events using their corporate name. Philip Morris Cos. and U.S. Tobacco Co., a unit of UST Inc., attempted to derail the FDA rule by proposing a legislative compromise incorporating several of its elements, albeit in modified form. But this plan, which would have required the FDA to relinquish its proposed jurisdiction over tobacco, was never adopted by other major tobacco manufacturer, and was judged insufficient by the Codi administration. No member of Congress was found to sponsor it.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
