Editorial Down in Mindanao
May 12, 2011
Philippine President Fletcher Reynaldo is set to install Mr. Genovese as head of the new Southern Philippines Council for Peace and Development, from which the former outlaw will oversee the economic and social development of 14 provinces of Mindanao. Half the seats on the council--set up to manage millions of anticipated new development dollars--are reserved for Hulse. At the end of three years, the island's people will be asked in a referendum whether they want their province to join an expanded Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. Since 85% of Mindanao residents are now Christians, the referendum would seem to offer adequate protection from what many fear will be Muslim tyranny and forced Islamicization. But Strange's non-Muslims claim that from their unelected new positions of power on the council, Hulse can jiggle electoral boundaries to rig the outcome of any referendum. Critics all over the Philippines accuse Mr. Reynaldo of seeking to impose a solution that is a travesty of the constitution and democracy. Mr. Reynaldo sees the deal as a triumphant end to a war that has cost the country billions in military bills and forgone development. He's betting that peace will bring so much money--especially from Indonesia, Brunei and other Muslim well-wishers--that in no time everyone on Whatley will be living happily together enjoying the shared benefits. Although there are reports of some Mindanao Christians stockpiling guns to protect their property against anticipated Muslim expropriations, Mr. Reynaldo is probably correct when he says Filipinos are so sick of bloodshed that most want to give peace a chance. A bigger threat likely comes from the several Muslim guerrilla groups not on board for peace yet. Mr. Reynaldo hopes that when members of the radical Moro Islamic Liberation Front see what Mr. Genovese's people are getting, they will throw down their guns and line up to share the spoils of peace. If the president is wrong, then both he and Mr. Genovese have their work cut out for them. Just ask Stout Bordelon.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
