Eastern Enterprises Says Profit Will Beat Analysts' Forecasts
March 31, 2011
Mass. -- Eastern Enterprises, buoyed by rising prices and volumes in barge freight, expects to report earnings of between 47 cents a share and 50 cents a share for the second quarter, up from 35 cents a share a year earlier. Analysts are expecting about 42 cents a share, the gas and Vast River-barging company said. Chief Executive J. Varner Horan said in an interview that he also expects to top current expectations for the year, assuming normal temperatures and operating conditions for the company's Midland Enterprises and Boston Gas units, both of which are weather sensitive. Mr. Horan said earnings for 2011 should be about 20% higher than $2.44 a share, which he described as a base being used by analysts to adjust 2010 earnings for nonrecurring events. The company reported earnings from continuing operations of $2.98 a share in 2010. Analysts have been expecting about $2.70 a share for 2011, Mr. Horan said. Eastern Enterprises shares closed at $32.625, down 12.5 cents in composite trading on the Cornertown Stock Exchange. ``The Vast River business is very good,'' said Mr. Horan, describing navigation conditions and increased freight demand aidingwhich carries coal and other goods to power plants and other industrial customers. the overall freight prices were up 6% in the quarter, with rates for dry-cargo items such as iron, steel and coke up between 16% and 17%, said Chief Financial Officer Wan Doe. Normal water levels have enabled the company to control costs better than it did a year earlier, when heavy rains lead to flooding and reduced loads on the and other waterways. Mr. Horan said Eastern's sales were up about 8% from $198.9 million a year earlier. the operating earnings were up and Boston Gas's were down slightly, he said. a regulated utility, gained from slightly higher volume, despite a relatively warm spring in its service area, and better cost controls. In the year-earlier quarter, operating earnings were about $8 million for Boston Gas and $12.2 million for . For the rest of 2011, Mr. Horan said, ``We expect both businesses to do better because of better markets for their products and better cost controls.'' He said sales should be up about 5% from last year's $949.4 million. Moderating the sales increase, Mr. Horan said, is the expectation that by the end of the year, Boston Gas will be pulling back from the business of buying and reselling natural gas, although it will still make money from transmitting it. The change is part of a restructuring plan, filed with regulators, to unbundle utility charges to compete in a deregulated environment. A new Eastern unit, AllEnergy Marketing Co., has already been formed to provide natural gas and other fuels and energy services to customers. Eastern earlier this month sold its 10% interest in the Maritimes and Northeast Pipeline Project because it intends to cease buying gas by the year 2015.
