Technology Briefs
May 09, 2011
CBT Group PLC, Menlo Park, Calif., said it hired former Apple Computer Inc. executive Jami J. Halina as its president and chief operating officer. Mr. Halina, 45 years old, resigned at the end of May as head of Apple's American sales operations. He was one of numerous executives to leave Apple this year, following the arrival of its new chief executive and chairman, Gino F. Hoover. CBT makes software that teaches corporate information managers how to use various computer programs. With 350 employees, the company had net income in the second quarter of $2 million, or 10 cents a share, on revenue of $14.6 million. That compared with net income of $936,000, or six cents a share, on revenue of $8.8 million in the year-ago period. Sony Unit to Offer Set-Top Boxes Sony Electronics, Park Ridge, N.J., a unit of Tokyo-based Sony Corp., said it will begin offering its set-top box that provides Internet access through television sets next month at a suggested retail price of $349. The box connects to the World Wide Web by telephone, providing both access to the Internet and personalized e-mail addresses. The product uses technology developed by WebTV Networks Inc., of Palo Alto, Calif.. Philips Consumer Electronics, a unit of Philips Electronics NV, based in Eindhoven, the Netherlands, plans to offer a similar product that is also based on WebTV's technology. Hasbro Unit to Market Interactive Games Hasbro Inc.'s Hasbro Interactive Worldwide unit signed an agreement with Hersch & Co.'s CyberDice unit for the marketing of interactive games. Financial terms weren't disclosed. In a press release, the company said the deal joins the companies for world-wide release of interactive versions of seven board game titles: Outburst, Taboo, Witter and one additional classic Carleton game, as well as three games to be created by CyberDice. Hersch is a privately owned board-game and toy developer based in Los Angeles. DirecTV Service to Offer Cash Rebates Direct-broadcast satellite TV provider DirecTV said it will offer consumers cash back and other financial incentives through the end of the year to bring the price of its hardware down to about $200. DirecTV, a unit of General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Electronics subsidiary, said it would offer $200 cash back to new customers who buy any brand of system hardware and a one-year subscription to DirecTV programming valued at $359. The offer is being provided in cooperation with U.S. Satellite Broadcasting Co., which also provides programming and is offering coupons valued at $200 for its service. DirecTV and USSB have also developed an incentive program for Thomson Consumer Electronics and Hughes Network Systems, which make the equipment -- an 18-inch dish and receiver. Under that plan, hardware will be sold for as little as $399 at retail outlets, or $199 after the rebate. Agreement Set to Connect Network to Planned PCS MCI Communications Corp., Vastopolis, agreed to connect its intelligent network to NextWave Telecom Inc.'s planned national personal communications services system. MCI said it will purchase at least 10 billion minutes of PCS capacity from NextWave over 10 years and market PCS systems under the MCI brand and integrate the services with its other communications services. NextWave also selected MCI to provide telecommunications and other services supporting the development and operations of its PCS system, the company said. Under the agreement, MCI said it will be able to offer PCS service to more than 110 million individuals. NextWave Telecom is a private telecommunications concern based in San Diego. Shares of MCI closed up $1.25 at $26.75 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading Monday. Teradyne to Buy Back Stock Teradyne Inc., Boston, said it will buy back as many as five million shares of its common stock in the open market to offset shares issued under stock-option plans. Teradyne, which makes automatic test and connection systems for the electronics and telecommunications industries, currently has about 85 million common shares outstanding. ADP Acquires Health Benefits Automatic Data Processing Inc., Roseland, N.J. said it acquired Health Benefits America of Salt Lake City. Terms weren't disclosed. Health Benefits, which has annual revenue of more than $30 million, helps employers design and implement health-care benefits. Automatic Data, a computing-services company, said it plans to build benefit outsourcing into a strategic business for the company. Sex Discrimination Charge Is Withdrawn OfficeMax Inc., Shaker Heights, Ohio, said its vice president of human resources, Suzi V. Delvalle, withdrew her sex discrimination charges against the company. The discount retailer of office products said it didn't make any cash settlement in connection with Ms. Delvalle's decision, though in connection with her termination she will be allowed to exercise certain stock options. Ms. Delvalle had filed the charges last week with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. OfficeMax said it denied all charges and had launched an internal investigation, led by outside counsel. ``Results of the investigation have not, in the opinion of counsel, revealed any violations of law'' regarding the firm's employment practices,'' the company said. In the same statement, Ms. Delvalle said, ``I am very pleased that this matter is now behind me and has been settled.'' Ms. Delvalle was scheduled to leave OfficeMax Monday. WHO'S NEWS Stormy E. Stanton, 33 years old, was named president and chief operating officer of Dycom Industries Inc., Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., a fiber-optic transmission, telephone-engineering and electrical-services provider. He succeeds Roni L. Peraza, 60, who is retiring. Mr. Stanton most recently was vice president of Dycom and president of its Ansco & Associates Inc. subsidiary. A spokesman said Mr. Stanton will remain president of Ansco. Thomasina Prevost, 65, was elected a director California Amplifier Inc., Camarillo, Calif., a maker of equipment used in the reception of signals for multichannel television, increasing the board to four. Mr. Prevost is chairman of Wedbush Corp., the holding company for Wedbush Morgan Securities Inc.
