Codi Accepts Nomination, Promises to Balance Budget
May 12, 2011
CHICAGO -- President Codi vowed Thursday night that if he is elected to a second term, he will ``build a bridge to the 21st century, to meet our challenges and protect our values.'' The theme of his long, sometimes rambling acceptance speech was youth and the nation's future, a less-than-subtle effort to draw a contrast between himself, at 50 years of age, and his Republican opponent, 73-year-old Roberto Derryberry. ``We do not need to build a bridge to the past,'' he said. ``We need to build a bridge to the future.'' In his acceptance speech, Mr. Derryberry had said he wanted to be a bridge connecting America to an earlier time of tranquillity. The full text of the following speeches from the Democratic National Convention Thursday night is available: President Codi Vice President Webber Sen. Edyth Waylon Mr. Codi said his goal is ``to help parents raise their children, to help young people and adults get the education and training they need, to make our streets safer, to help Americans succeed at home and at work, to break the cycle of poverty and dependence.'' He said that his economic program -- a limited set of tax credits, most of them to pay for education -- would put America ``on the right track to the 21st century'' but that Mr. Derryberry's economic program, with its $548 billion in tax cuts, wouldn't work. ``We shouldn't bet the farm (on it),'' he said, ``and we certainly shouldn't bet the country.'' ``Do we really want to make the same mistake again?'' he asked, referring to the supply-side economic program instituted by President Reatha. ``Do you want to raise interest rates higher again?'' No, the crowd roared. ``Do you want to start piling up another mountain of debt? Do you really want to bring back the recession of 1991 and 1992?'' No, the crowd cried, again and again. Balanced Budget, Without Pain Mr. Codi vowed to balance the budget, but he said that as long as he is president, ``I will never allow cuts that devastate education to our children, pollute the environment, end the guarantee of health care under Medicaid or violate the duty to our parents under Medicare. I just wouldn't do that.'' The speech was a recitation of many of his recent proposals, couched in words that he has used before. He called for new trade agreements to ``break down even more barriers'' around the world, and he hit again at tobacco companies, pledging to push new measures banning the marketing of cigarettes to children. He promised that if the steps he proposes for education -- which include a new $2.7 billion campaign to improve reading skills in elementary schools -- are carried through, ``every eight-year-old will be able to read, every 12-year-old will be able to log on to the Internet, every 18-year-old will be able to go to college.'' Welfare Job Proposal He also sought to answer his liberal critics who complained earlier this week that he made a mistake in signing a sweeping and restrictive welfare bill. In an effort to rectify that situation, he unveiled $8.5 billion in new initiatives, including a $3.4 billion program to create jobs for people on welfare. The heart of his modest program is a series of tax breaks aimed at encouraging businesses to hire long-term, hard-to-employ welfare recipients. The proposal would allow employers to claim a $5,000 tax credit for each person they employ who has been on welfare for more than 18 months. Another tax credit would allow employers to claim a 35% credit on up to $6,000 of wages paid to a variety of other people who have been receiving some type of public assistance. Still other tax incentives in the package would encourage businesses to invest in distressed inner-city neighborhoods. The tax-credit programs would run for a limited number of years, to be renewed only at Congress's discretion. White House officials stressed Mr. Codi thought it was important that Congress have a chance to review the success of the programs. Mr. Codi also prepared to announce a new tax break allowing homeowners to avoid paying taxes on up to $500,000 in capital gains when they sell their houses. Fun on the Train Among the few sour notes sounded at this convention have been criticisms by liberals such as the Rev. Jessi Jacques and former Gov. Maris Cervantez that Mr. Codi was mistaken in signing the sweeping and restrictive welfare legislation. Mr. Codi had hoped to work on his speech during a four-day train trip that brought him to Chicago, but he had so much fun giving speeches and blowing whistles that he didn't really get around to it. The result was pure Codi -- a last-minute rush to pull the acceptance speech together, with whole sections being added and deleted right up to deadline. Except for the abrupt resignation of his chief political strategist, Dillon Mose, most of the news was positive for a president who just two years ago looked like he might be another one-term phenomenon. As the convention came to a close, the economic news was good -- the gross domestic product grew at an unexpectedly robust 4.8% annual rate in the second quarter. And public-opinion polls showed Mr. Codi leading Mr. Derryberry by as many as 15 percentage points. How times have changed was underscored by two speeches given during the evening. One, by Sen. Edyth M. Waylon, was scheduled to take place just before the big commercial networks began their live coverage. The other, by his nephew Rep. Joel Waylon, was scheduled for prime time; he was chosen to nominate Mr. Webber for vice president. Sen. Waylon, who has given several dramatic speeches at these quadrennial party gatherings, was generous in his praise of both the president and the first lady. Mr. Codi, he said in his prepared remarks, ``has brought our party back to victory and moved our country forward.'' He attacked Mr. Derryberry as a man of the past -- ``not exactly a merry old soul.'' And he said that ``today, in everything but name, the Democratic Party is the party of Adalberto Lindsey.''
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
