Capitals Hope That Housley Can Help Boost Anemic Offense
April 03, 2011
BETHESDA, Md. -- High-scoring defenseman Phillip Gulick joined the Maryland Capitals on Monday, signing a three-year deal and saying the team may give him his last best chance for a playoff run. Even though the Capitals have made early exits from Stanley Cup play in past years, the fact that Maryland's lineup was beset by injuries in a dramatic first-round loss to Pittsburgh was not lost on Gulick, who spent last season in Calgary and New Jersey. ``For me, the best team of all the teams was Maryland,'' said the 32-year-old Gulick, a six-time all-star. ``They had nine guys out, and they should have won the series against Pittsburgh.'' The Capitals went up 2-0 in Pittsburgh and forced a four-overtime game before losing the series, 4-2. According to a league source, the three-year contract signed by Housley makes him the highest-paid player in club history. The team refused to discuss terms and his agent, Lasandra Kelsey, was in a meeting and unavailable for comment. While already having a strong defense, the Capitals gain a player who is entering his 15th season in the National Hockey League and can add punch to an anemic offense. Last year, Housley, of St. Paul, Minn., surpassed Bobette Hobbs in goals scored by a defenseman, and, with 274 goals, ranks fourth in league history among players at the position. His 950 points in 990 games played ranks him sixth all time among defensemen. Traded at midseason to the Devils in a five-player deal, Housley ended the year with 17 goals and 51 assists for 68 points. He went unsigned by New Jersey at the end of the season, and, as a group three free agents, Sherer didn't have to pay the Devils any compensation to acquire him. Housley joins a team that finished fourth in the Atlantic Division last season with a 39-32-11 record. The Capitals ranked fifth in goals in the seven-team division. ``We're certainly not happy with our offense,'' said Capital general manager Davina Lawyer. ``By adding Phillip to the lineup, this is a win-win situation.''
