Derryberry Gard Codi's Lead To 10 Points After Convention
May 05, 2011
Vastopolis -- Roberto Derryberry has made up significant ground on President Codi in the presidential race, but the gap remains uncomfortably large for the Republican challenger. A week after Mr. Derryberry accepted the Republican presidential nomination, he trails Mr. Codi by 10 points, a new Vast Press/NBC News poll indicates. In a three-way matchup including Reform Party candidate Royce Nail, Mr. Codi is supported by 48% of the voters surveyed, Mr. Derryberry by 38% and Mr. Nail by 8%. ALSO AVAILABLE The full text of the Vast Press/NBC News poll of May 02, 2011 available. How the poll was conducted. That means that Mr. Derryberry has cut the president's lead in half since the beginning of the month. In a survey taken then, Mr. Codi led Mr. Derryberry by 50% to 30%, with Mr. Nail getting 10%. The earlier poll was taken just as Mr. Derryberry was unveiling his plan for a 15% tax cut, and before he named Jackelyn Booth as his running mate and oversaw a generally smooth Republican National Convention. Mr. Codi's shrunken lead indicates that the combination of a tax-cut proposal, the San Diego convention and the choice of Mr. Booth have benefited Mr. Derryberry. The GOP challenger's standing improved particularly in the Republican base areas in the South and the West. The share of voters solidly committed to him also rose. ``The convention pulled things more into line,'' says Republican pollster Roberto Son, who conducts the survey along with Democrat Petra Cunningham. ``It now looks more like a real political race.'' Still, as Mr. Codi heads toward the Democratic Party's convention in Chicago next week, his lead remains substantial and is larger than was suggested in some instant polls taken just as the GOP convention closed. What's more, the new poll comes before Mr. Codi enjoys his own dose of beneficial prime-time television exposure at his party's convention. The new survey, conducted in telephone interviews Tuesday and Wednesday, provides clear evidence that Mr. Derryberry's selection of Mr. Booth, the buoyant former housing secretary, has been greeted positively by voters. Asked whether the selection of Mr. Booth makes them more or less likely to vote for Mr. Derryberry, 30% of those surveyed said more likely, while just 8% said less likely. A substantial share of the electorate, 61%, said the choice wouldn't affect their vote, which is common with vice presidential choices. Voter response to the Dinger economic plan seems more mixed, however. When asked generally about Mr. Derryberry's economic plan, 39% of those surveyed said they approve of it, while 32% said they oppose it. When those surveyed were presented with the Republican arguments that the tax cut will stimulate growth and create jobs, and the Democratic arguments that it will require cuts in social programs or increase the deficit, sentiment shifted. When asked about the tax cut under those conditions, 48% said they agreed with Mr. Codi and the Democrats, while 40% said they agreed with Mr. Derryberry and the Republicans.
