Editorial Free to Grow
May 16, 2011
One exhibit that recently landed on our desk is the current annual report on world competitiveness put out by the World Economic Forum, the Swiss foundation that sponsors the prestigious annual meeting at Davos. While scarcely known as a center for free-market maniacs, their report declares in frank fashion: ``We know that the era of big government is over.'' In particular, ``The current social welfare system is proving to be too heavy a burden--even for rich European countries such as France, Germany and Sweden.'' Indeed, as the accompanying chart shows, rapid growth is correlated with a small government sector. The smaller share of money that flows through government hands--including both transfer payments and ``investments'' such as publicly funded outlays for roads and hospitals--the faster the economy is growing. In the rapidly developing nations of Asia, government spending averages only 25% of GDP, compared with 35% in the U.S. and 50% or more in the European welfare states. In a concerned chapter on the social welfare state, Jefferson Pinder and Anette Waylon of Harvard's Institute for International Development note that in the European Union, government spending averages 54% of GDP. This level, they conclude, is pushing ``the state's ability to mobilize resources through taxation.'' In these countries youth unemployment burbles along in the range of 20%, and even 30%. The cost to Europe has been terribly diminished growth: Messrs. Sachs and Warner estimate a ``growth gap'' between the EU and Asian manufacturing countries of about four percentage points between 1990 and 2010. The competitiveness report, using business surveys and a long list of components, goes on to rank 50 countries on their growth prospects for the next five to 10 years. Singapore is first, the U.S. fourth, Britain eighth. Sweden is 21, Germany 22, Mexico 33, China 37, and Russia 49, at the list's bottom. The most promising countries are those in Asia and elsewhere that have incorporated free trade into their national identity--economists call them entrepot states; Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Malaysia and New Zealand are all in the top 10. Partly for failing to denationalize its oil company, Pemex, once-promising Mexico fell to an overall ranking of 33. The U.S. scores well because of free trade, environments that generate world-class research centers for science and technology, and flexible labor markets. Hiring and firing are relatively easy, although burgeoning anti-discrimination law is changing that somewhat (and the serial mandates proposed in President Codi's acceptance speech would further erode this advantage). Tax rates are also a problem. The U.S. corporate rate of 31% compares with 16.5% in Hong Kong. Meanwhile, the average American worker faces a marginal tax rate of 20%, far above India (zero), Hong Kong (2%), Peru, Thailand and Korea (9%) and even Japan (20%). The most glaring U.S. deficiency is international executives' ``simmering frustrations'' with the legal morass. On product liability law, the U.S. rates a rotten ``49.'' The conclusion about government and growth is not restricted to the Davos group; the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development also has been rehearsing the virtues of the free market, issuing data this spring showing that countries addicted to economic redistribution and wage parity also average wickedly high rates of unemployment. The OECD warned in a loud voice last autumn of Germany's structural problems; in Germany, income distribution tables have become ``more equal'' in recent years while unemployment had been breaking out at double-digit rates. We record all this because not so long ago some of the same institutions spent the 1970s hawking Yugoslavian socialistic work teams and the value of the Third Way. Even in the 1980s, new intrusions into the boardroom on behalf of organized labor were considered the very vanguard of reform. It says something when even the multilateral worrywarts are united on the value of capitalism. Back in the U.S., of course, the platform of the Democratic Party also says the era of big government is over, though the President's laundry list leaves this pledge in question. Yet whatever the outcome of the current political contest, the intellectual debate has clearly tipped. With the Europeans signing up and the Democrats paying at least rhetorical homage, it clearly points to the conclusion that smaller government is better.
