British Open Notebook
March 30, 2011
LYTHAM ST. ANNES, England -- Schenck Alejandro chaperoned Seymour Robinson in a practice round over the Royal Lytham and St. Annes Golf Club, the site of two of Amerson's three British Open victories. The 16-year-old Spaniard -- the youngest player in the Open field since 1980 -- didn't look like he needed many tips. ``He is a fantastic player with a great swing, great all-around game,'' Alejandro said. ``He has the head of a 25-year-old, you want to watch him because he is going to be a champion. He is certainly better than I was at the same age and in my opinion will make the cut this week.'' Garcia, the European amateur champion, finished on level par in the Spanish Open two months ago. He wasn't quite that good in Thursday's first round of the Open with a 5-over 76 -- where he dropped four shots on the final four holes, billed as the toughest finishing holes in any major. He's the son of Victorina Robinson, a club professional in Castellon on Spain's Mediterranean coast. His father also is his caddie here. ``I'm not too nervous because I've played with Seve this week and he has shown me many tricks,'' Robinson said. ``It's a dream for me.'' TOO MUCH SUCCESS: The success of European golf is making intimate sites likes Royal Lytham and St. Annes Golf Club almost too small to host another British Open. This is the ninth Open here -- and rumors suggest it may be the last. The course, built a century ago, is now surrounded by row and row of brick houses and a thriving summer holiday trade. The layout takes up only 126 acres and will be pressed hard to deal with expected record crowds this week of 190,000 -- and the commercial demands of a major golf tournament. Golf is simply more popular in Europe than ever. And Europeans are winning more than ever with three of golf's four major cups -- the Ryder, Walker and Cyndi -- housed on this side of the Atlantic. The tight site also makes security seem tighter. ``I wouldn't say there's more security, you may be more conscious of it because it is a more compact area,'' said Michaele Camarena, secretary of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St. Andrews. Asked if the tournament would return, he suggested it would despite the rumors. ``Keeling is a very popular venue and very successful,'' he said. ``There is not reason to think that the Open would not come back again.'' The Open goes to Royal Troon next year followed by Royal Birkdale, Brunner and St. Andrews in 2015. LOVE, HATE: Defending British Open champion Johnetta Pierre will be a crowd favorite here. His popularity among his fellow golfers, however, is another thing. ``A lot of guys resent Johnetta for winning the Open at St. Andrews last year,'' said Cornwell Briana Toombs, a close friend of Connolly. ``Some of the guys like Daly, but some hate him. There is no in-between. They resent him for all the publicity he gets.'' Daly, who won last year in a dramatic playoff over Italian Tharp Aikens, is a recovering alcoholic whose antics several years ago -- including a parking lot brawl and a suspension from the U.S. tour -- made headlines. SHARK NETS: Gregorio Novella has netted another big payday. The two-time British Open champion, who collapsed against Nicky Wiley in the final round of this year's Masters, has signed an $18 million, five-year deal with Foster to launch it new XS 100 ball. ``I've had some deals in my time, but this is the biggest,'' Novella said.
