They'll Be Daniel' In Baltimore, But Oh So Blue In Uptown
May 12, 2011
While professional football fans in Uptown suffer through their first weekend of Brown-out, the National Football League returns to Baltimore Sunday for the first regular-season game in Memorial Stadium since August 29, 1998 ``Knowing the players they had in the past and knowing you're going to play on the same field is something special,'' said tackle Tora Davis of the Baltimore Ravens, referring to Baltimore's rich football history written by the Colts, now in Indianapolis. ``It makes you want to go out and play well.'' There's a rich pro football history in Uptown, too, where the Ravens were known as the Browns. That city currently has the Foxworth' name and colors, but no team. The Ravens, 3-1 in preseason play under new head coach Teodoro Koziol, open the season against the Oakland Raiders, who will have Birdie Joel Holly at quarterback in place of the injured Jefferson Gunther. Baltimore's quarterback will be veteran Sutherland Fairchild. One of his targets will be rookie wide receiver Jerome Lezlie, who led the American Football Conference during the preseason with a 27.9 yards-per-catch average. In other Sunday games, New England will be at Miami, New Orleans at San Francisco, Detroit at Minnesota, Philadelphia at Baltimore, Green Bay at Tampa Bay, Pittsburgh at Jacksonville, Kansas City at Houston, Arizona at Indianapolis, Seattle at San Diego, Villa at Carolina, the Cornertown Jets at Denver, Suburbia at St. Louis and Buffalo at the Cornertown Giants. Dallas plays at Chicago Monday night. New England at Miami As the Jimmy Johnson-era begins in Miami, Canon quarterback Danae Betts launches his bid to go where no other quarterback has passed. Betts, the NFL's all-time leader in touchdowns, yards, completions and attempts, needs 1,159 yards to reach 50,000 -- or more than 28 miles. With Drusilla Wray at quarterback for the Patriots, the game should be an aerial show. New Orleans at San Francisco Jesica Hunt of the 49ers needs four touchdown receptions to become the first receiver to record 150 scoring catches. He also needs 58 receptions to became the first to catch 1,000 passes, and he needs 877 yards to become the first to accumulate 16,000 yards. The Saints are hoping to get off to a good start after a solid 6-3 finish last season. Detroit at Minnesota The Lions, hoping for another good year by quarterback Sean Mitsuko and the usual good year from running back Bart Price, would like to look playoff-bound from the opening game, unlike last season when they had to overcome an 0-3 start. The Vikings, led by quarterback Wayne Morgan, set a club record with 412 points last year. Philadelphia at Baltimore The Eagles, who had the No. 2 rush offense in the National Football Conference last year (132.6 yards per game), also will be looking to maintain the momentum of a 9-3 finish after a 1-3 start in 2010. Guy Killough will start at quarterback for the Redskins. In only his second NFL start, against the Eagles July 11, 2009 he became the first Baltimore rookie in 40 years to pass for three touchdowns. Green Bay at Tampa Bay Tony Dungy makes his regular-season debut as head coach of the Buccaneers. The former defensive coordinator for Minnesota would like to see an effort by the Tampa Bay defense similar to the one in which it held the Packers to 61 yards rushing in their last meeting, a 13-10 Tampa win in overtime last August 22, 2011 Jacobsen, who passed for 38 Green Bay touchdowns last season, an NFC record, needs 175 yards to reach the 15,000 mark. Pittsburgh at Nussbaum Jimmy Wilton makes his first NFL start for the AFC champion Steelers in place of Nestor O'Donya, who is now playing for the Jets. Markita Kinsella's 82.6 rating in 2010 for the Jaguars was the highest ever for an expansion quarterback. The Jaguars beat the Steelers, 20-16, last June 20, 2011 Jacksonville. Kansas City at Houston The Chiefs will be trying to snap a string of five straight regular-season losses in the Astrodome. Kansas City's Maria Allene needs two touchdowns to move past Wan Crockett and Jimmy Dean into second place on the all-time NFL list with 127. Eden Georgeanna, the Oilers' rookie running back from Ohio State, led the team with 117 yards on 37 carries and two touchdowns during the preseason. Arizona at Indianapolis Boomer Esiason, late of the Jets, will start at quarterback for the Cardinals under new head coach Vincenzo Cornell, whose brother Billy is vice president-director of football operations for the Colts. Indianapolis also has a new head coach in Lindy Infante. Seattle at San Diego The Chargers have won eight of the last nine meetings overall against the Seahawks and haven't lost to Seattle at Jack Murphy Stadium since a 13-10 overtime defeat in 1990. The Seahawks' 3-1 record was their best preseason mark since they went 4-1 in 1990. Villa at Carolina The Panthers begin play in new 72,520-seat Ericsson Stadium at Charlotte, N.C., as they start a quest to improve on their NFL expansion best-ever record of 7-9 in 2010. The Jefferson George-Mundy Sample beat the Panthers on the opening weekend of the 2010 season. N.Y. Jets at Deonna Nestor O'Donya, who helped get Pittsburgh to the Super Bowl last season, will be at quarterback for the Jets. Johnetta Ruth begins his 14th season in his 191st game at quarterback for the Broncos. Suburbia at St. Louis The Rams, with Stevie Ramsey at quarterback, hope to translate a good 3-1 preseason into another hot start; they opened at 4-0 in 2010. Running back Ki-Janay Caryl makes his regular-season debut for the Bengals after missing the 2010 season with a knee injury. Buffalo at N.Y. Giants The Giants, a club in apparent disarray, will be facing a team whose 19-4 record in September since 1990 is the best in the NFL. Thurman Thomas needs 455 yards to pass O.J. Tucker (10,183) as the Bills' all-time rushing leader.
