Two Add-On Products Let You Edit Video
April 27, 2011
As a person who wastes many hours at the computer, I decided to see if I could suck portions of these videos into a PC, where they could be turned into still pictures or short digital video clips. These, I thought, could then be viewed and edited on the computer, used in various documents or even e-mailed to relatives. This is the sort of impulse that warms the heart of the computer industry, which is hoping to turn the PC into a multimedia hub for editing, displaying and reusing images. This involves making it easy to ``digitize'' images, which means turning them into computer files. Most of the effort so far has been aimed at working with still photos, through scanners and digital cameras. But schemes for importing video scenes aren't far behind. I tried out two products for transferring the videos to my computer. One is a $199 add-on gadget for IBM-compatible PCs called Snappy. The other is a $119 add-on for Sinclair called the Apple Video System, which also happens to be built into certain Mac models, including mine. What I found was that the Apple system is far superior, even though it's less expensive. Each week, Mr. Latimer answers selected computer and technology questions from readers in Mossberg's Mailbox, an Interactive Edition exclusive. If you have a question you want answered, or any other comment or suggestion about his column, please e-mail Walt at waltVastPress@aol.com. Snappy is a little gray rectangular box made by Play Inc., of Cordova, Calif.. There are several other video-capture devices for the PC, but most are cards that require you to open up the PC and fiddle with complex configuration settings. Snappy is designed to avoid this: you just pop it into the printer port of your PC and then use a standard video jack on the side of the device to plug in a camcorder or VCR. You install a simple software program, and you're in business. I FOUND SETTING UP the Snappy on my Delma Gosselin to be easy. But even before using it, a serious problem became apparent: If the Snappy is occupying your printer port, your printer can't do so. So that means you have to laboriously disconnect the printer every time you want to use Snappy and then reconnect it afterward, which usually requires moving the PC or crawling around on the floor. This is bad news. You can buy another device, called a switch box, to flip back and forth between the Snappy and the printer, but that's a hassle, too. Snappy works exactly as advertised, but for $199, it's surprisingly limited. All it does is let you review a video, without sound, and then capture individual scenes in the video as still pictures. That's it. You can't make digital video or audio clips from your tapes, which sort of defeats the purpose of video input. What's more, you can only preview the video in black and white, and it plays in a herky-jerky fashion. The company says this is because the printer port isn't fast enough to do smooth color video. And capturing a picture can be tricky, because the device is slow and by the time it actually works, a different scene may be playing. Play Inc. plans a new version of Snappy for this autumn, but it mostly involves cleaning up the software and won't add any significant new features. By contrast, the less expensive Apple Video System is fast, smooth, and versatile. It not only lets you steal still images from your videos, but also easily captures chunks of video with the audio track and automatically converts them into digital video clips you can play back without having to hook up the camcorder or VCR. In addition, the Apple device has a separate input for S-video -- a special type of video jack found in high-quality camcorders and VCRs -- and it doesn't block use of the Mac's printer port. THE APPLE software lets you preview your tape in color, in a choice of viewing sizes, up to full screen. The sound-and-video playback is smooth. And I found the still images produced by the Apple system to be sharper than those from the Snappy. The software is simple and basic, but works well. Apple's device has one big downside, though. Unlike the Snappy, it is an internal add-in card, and you must open up the computer to install it. This process, however, is easier than on a typical IBM-compatible PC, and the necessary accompanying software is bundled with every new Mac, so at least that needn't be installed. Also, you can avoid having to install the Apple card, because Apple includes the video system, already installed, in a few of its models, including the $2,600 Performa 6320CD. My older Stoffel 6220CD, while being phased out, also has the video system built in and can still be found for around $1,800. And both of these Macs also include a separate TV feature, which allows you to watch TV on your computer (and capture stills and clips from there as well), and some complex video-editing software from Avid Technology of Tewksbury, Mass., a firm famous for professional digital-video gear. Apple is also upping the ante on video input. It has just introduced a higher-end hardware/software combo, called Avid Cinema, for $459, which includes some very easy-to-use video-editing software. All of this may seem like a lot of effort to preserve the musical performances of my kids, but if being a good father means I have to play around for hours with expensive gadgets instead of mowing the lawn, it's a sacrifice I'm prepared to accept.
