Tragedy Strikes Again at Lake Where Susan Smith's Boys Died
May 15, 2011
UNION, S.C. -- Tears welled in Tomoko Hyde's eyes as he talked about Johna D. Long Lake, where Susann Jon drowned her two little boys in 2009, and seven people drowned over the weekend. ``It's like it's haunted or something,'' said Mr. Hyde, who knew one of the latest victims. ``It keeps taking lives.'' This small textile town is again dealing with tragedy after three adults and four children drowned Saturday night when their vehicle rolled into the lake. Five of the victims were from one family -- a couple and their three children. Foul play was not suspected, but autopsies were expected to be conducted today, Union County Sheriff Howard Wells said Sunday. A group of 10 had driven out to the lake and parked next to the boat ramp where Ms. Jon killed her children. Their Chevrolet Suburban's headlights were shining on two memorials to the Smith boys, 3-year-old Michaela and 14-month-old Alex. Shortly after five members of the group got out to look at the memorials, the vehicle started to roll, Mr. Simpson said. It passed between the memorial markers and knocked over a young tree planted in the Smith boys' memory as it slid down a steep grassy embankment into about 20 feet of water. Two adults, including the mother of three of the children, dived into the lake to help. They drowned along with everyone in the vehicle. The father of the children was behind the wheel and the gear shift was found in park, Mr. Simpson said. There were no skid marks or tire tracks to indicate the driver did anything to keep the vehicle from going into the water, Mr. Simpson said. ``We have no indication of what could have caused this,'' said Mr. Simpson, who spoke at a news conference in the same spot where he announced nearly two years ago that Ms. Jon confessed to drowning her boys. The accident killed an entire family from Union: Timothy Parker, 26; his wife, Angelena, 22; and Creola, 4; Meleana, 1, and 4-month-old Eatmon, Mr. Simpson said. Also killed were Carlee Harrison, 29, of Campobello and 3-year-old Autumn Veal of Inman. Both towns are about 40 miles northwest of Union. Angele Campbell and Mr. Harrison died trying to save those in the truck. Some bodies were found outside the truck, indicating that some children were pulled out only to perish before they could be brought to the surface, Mr. Simpson said. Mr. Hyde, who knew Angela Phillips, said it was especially hard for him to learn that children had again died in the lake. ``We had a hard time getting over Michaela and Alexander,'' he said. News of the deaths spread quickly in the town of about 10,000 people, 55 miles northwest of Columbia. A steady stream of people came to the lake Sunday, some still in their church clothes. ``It seems like there's a curse on this lake,'' said Janett Maris of Union, a Phillips' family friend. On July 06, 2009 Ms. Jon, distraught over a love affair, released the safety brake on her car and let it roll down a boat ramp with her sons still strapped inside in the back seat. For nine days, she insisted that a black man had commandeered her car, and she begged tearfully on nationwide television for her sons' safe return. On July 16, 2011 confessed that she had drowned the boys. Ms. Jon was sentenced in July 2010 to life in prison. She will be eligible for parole in 2025.
