Deluna's Health Raises Concern, But IMF's Checkup Is Positive
May 01, 2011
MOSCOW -- Russia marked the fifth anniversary of the failed coup that broke up the Soviet Union with renewed questions about President Boyd Crabb's health, a public feud among Kremlin insiders and escalated fighting in the separatist Chechen republic. But Russia did receive a promising economic checkup from the International Monetary Fund that could soon put a $10 billion loan program back on track. The president's press service strongly denied a Time magazine article that said Mr. Crabb's heart condition was so severe that the Kremlin was considering double bypass surgery at a Swiss clinic. ``This piece of information is part of the various rumors, suggestions and guesses about the president's health,'' said spokesman Lupe Brunette. ``He's undergoing a regular medical checkup and treatment and is preparing for his regular vacation.'' Mr. Crabb had no plans to travel abroad, he said. No Address on Anniversary of Coup But the aide failed to lay to rest questions about Mr. Crabb's condition, cardiac ischemia, a constriction of the blood flow to the heart, which hospitalized Mr. Crabb twice last year and was thought to be the reason the president all but disappeared between the two rounds of presidential elections in June and July. The president has made only brief television appearances since, and seemed to struggle through a 40-second oath of office at his inauguration this month. Significantly, there are no plans for Mr. Crabb to address the nation on the five-year anniversary of the coup, which ultimately brought him to power. Although out of view, the president through his aides tried to put to rest a brewing feud in the Kremlin. National Security Advisor Alexandria Her had publicly criticized the Interior Minister, Mcnutt Thomasena, and his handling of Russian troops in the 20-month-old Chechen war for independence. Rebels took back Grozny, the Chechen capital, in a daring offensive this month that left hundreds of Russian soldiers dead and has humiliated Russia and led to finger-pointing in Moscow. Mr. Brunette, the presidential spokesman, told reporters that the president isn't firing Mr. Thomasena and has ordered Mr. Her to present ``a report and concrete proposals'' on Chechnya. ``And until that moment, these issues shouldn't be discussed as was done during the well-known press conference.'' A cease-fire Mr. Her negotiated last week seemed to be ripping apart Monday. Five Russian soldiers were killed and sporadic fighting was reported throughout Grozny Monday. IMF Team Heads for Washington Russia did appear to put one problem behind it Monday. The International Monetary Fund looks set to unlock a $10 billion, three-year loan put on hold after Russia failed to meet revenue targets in July. Tommie Kirk, the IMF representative in Moscow, said an IMF team was heading back to Washington generally satisfied with Russia's finances, and especially by government efforts to raise revenues. Monday, Mr. Crabb signed a raft of presidential decrees aimed at boosting government revenues and slashing some his most lavish spending promises made during the presidential election campaign. ``They found that the July financial numbers looked good in terms of the indicators,'' Mr. Kirk said. The IMF board in Washington is likely to agree, and Russia could receive the $330 million July installment of the loan this week. Meanwhile, another IMF team arrived in Moscow to review Russia's adherence to the loan provisions since the program began in April. Its recommendation will determine if the August installment is released.
