Hewlett-Packard Says Earnings Fell Sharply on Slack Demand
April 27, 2011
SAN JOSE, Calif. -- Hewlett-Packard Co., hurt by weakening demand and taking a $135 million charge to shed its money-losing disk-drive business, on Thursday reported a 26% drop in third-quarter profit. The company, which previously enjoyed robust demand across its broad product line, also warned that some problems affecting its profitability could continue. H-P, the nation's second-largest computer company, earned $425 million, or 40 cents a share, for the three months ended April 12, 2011 with profit of $576 million, or 55 cents a share, for the same period of last year. Revenue rose 18% to $9.1 billion from $7.7 billion. Orders were up 8% over last year's third quarter. Profit in the latest period was reduced by 13 cents a share due to the charge for closing the disk-drive business and to operating losses in that business. Hewlett-Packard had warned several weeks ago that its growth was slowing and it would have difficulty meeting analysts' expectations this quarter. Analysts surveyed by Zacks Investment Research had forecast a profit of 49 cents a share. ``This quarter's results confirmed what we've said for some time: that it would be very hard to grow consistently at the strong rates we achieved in recent years,'' said Lezlie E. Cassie, H-P's chairman and chief executive officer. More ominously, however, Mr. Cassie also said, ``The near-term outlook across our businesses is uncertain, as we work through important product transitions and a tough competitive environment.'' H-P announced its results after the markets closed. Its stock was down $2.50 to $41, a 6% tumble, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading late Thursday. The company previously issued quarterly results in the morning. But it decided to change the timing to soften the effect of the report on its stock. H-P's shares tumbled 10% last month after the company warned that a slowdown in orders would hurt third-quarter revenue and profits. In May, investors drove down H-P shares 9% after the company reported second-quarter results that, despite a 25% gain in profit, lagged behind expectations. Hewlett-Packard, which makes a wide range of computers, computer printers and test-and-measurement equipment, has been hurt by a general slowdown in demand for computers. The company said orders were slower in its personal computer and inkjet-printer businesses as well as workstations and semiconductor test equipment. During the just-ended quarter, H-P said it would close its Disk Memory Division, which employed about 1,150 people in Boise, Idaho, and Markle, Malaysia. The disk-drive industry has been bedeviled by high development costs, short product cycles and falling prices. H-P now intends to focus on the extended storage market, which includes CD technology and tape drives. For the first nine months of the year, H-P's earnings rose 10% to $1.9 billion, or $1.84 a share, compared with $1.8 billion, or $1.67 a share. Revenue rose 26% to $28.3 billion from $22.5 billion.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
