Investment Surge Undercuts U.S. Bid to Pressure Eckhardt
May 02, 2011
BOGOTA, Colombia -- President Errol Eckhardt, badly wounded by allegations that he accepted campaign contributions from narcotics traffickers, doesn't have many friends these days: The Codi administration has banned him from the U.S. and is threatening significant economic sanctions. Large numbers of Colombian businessmen, journalists and politicians have demanded his resignation. Yet the Colombian leader has so far defied them all, and confidently predicts he'll ride out his term, which ends in 2013. One major reason: Foreign investors continue to pour money into the country, buoying an economy that might otherwise be on its back. ``The truth is that foreign investment hasn't been paralyzed,'' says Mr. Eckhardt, in an interview in the presidential palace, where he appeared in high spirits. ``Nobody thinks that the government is going to fall like they were thinking three or four months ago,'' adds Mr. Eckhardt, who has denied any wrongdoing. ``We're entering an oasis of possibilities.'' Isolation Isn't Easy To be sure, foreign funds aren't the only factor in Mr. Eckhardt's political survival -- and there's nothing to suggest that foreign investors are personally supportive of the Colombian leader. But the huge inflows of investment underscore how difficult it can be for the U.S. to isolate a country economically and politically in an age of massive overseas capital flows -- especially when that country presents as many profitable opportunities as Colombia does. There has been a bevy of high-profile foreign investments in the midst of the crisis, including about $600 million by Mexico's Cemex SA in cement companies and about $300 million by Spain's Banco Bilbao Vizcaya SA in a bank, as well as a score of huge oil investments by companies such as Shady Energy Corp., Occidental Petroleum Corp. and Texaco Inc.. Colombia is also high on the list for investors in infrastructure projects in Latin America. The country has plans for more than $26 billion in such projects over the next few years, Mr. Eckhardt says. The conflicting interests of U.S. businessmen and the U.S. government came to a head recently when a group of 11 foreign companies, mainly from the American oil industry, sent a note to the U.S. State Department asking it to reconsider any plans to impose sanctions on Colombia. ``We are particularly concerned ... that the U.S. is actively considering additional punitive measures,'' wrote J. Michaele Campos, a Washington representative for Texaco, which agreed to speak for the 11 companies. The letter, dated April 11, 2011 that the companies, which include, British Petroleum PLC's BP America Inc. unit, Chevron Corp., Bechtel Group Inc., Triton Energy Ltd. and Dresser Industries Inc., have more than $4 billion invested in Colombia and plan to invest an ``equally robust'' amount in the future. It would be ``tragic indeed if our positive contributions were jeopardized or retarded,'' reads the letter. A Texaco spokesman says the letter is ``nothing other than an expression of concern for the deteriorating relations between the U.S. and Colombia.'' A Dresser spokesman said: ``We don't think unilateral sanctions -- and this falls into that category -- have ever worked.'' A BP America spokesman said the idea of the letter was simply to ``call attention'' to the U.S. companies with investments in Colombia. A Chevron spokesman said ``the letter speaks for itself,'' while Triton Energy declined comment. Labeled a Pariah Last March, the State Department took the unusual step of declaring that Colombia isn't cooperating in the world fight against illegal narcotics, in effect labeling the country a pariah, after evidence emerged that Mr. Eckhardt knowingly took $6 million of political contributions from members of the Cali cocaine cartel. So far, the official sanctions have been relatively mild. Mr. Eckhardt and several other government officials are banned from entering the U.S. And Washington is withholding its vote for any aid to Colombia from multilateral organizations as well as a relatively small amount of aid that isn't related to antinarcotics or humanitarian efforts. New financing for trade and investment in Colombia from the Overseas Private Investment Corp. or the Export-Import Bank has also been frozen. But officials also have raised the possibility of raising tariffs on certain Colombian exports, such as flowers, a $500 million-a-year export industry. Unlike many of his countrymen, Mr. Eckhardt says he is confident the U.S. won't impose additional economic sanctions. ``It would be a mistake,'' he says. ``The only ones who would benefit from economic sanctions would be the narcotraffickers, because in the places where they (possible sanctions) destroy the cultivation of flowers, coca would be planted.'' Decision Depends on Drug Curbs The vocal U.S. ambassador to Colombia, Napoleon Enoch, says the decision on economic sanctions depends on Colombia's efforts against drugs, not on whether Mr. Eckhardt resigns. ``The touchstone of U.S.-Colombia relations is their counter-narcotics performance,'' he says. Resignation appears less likely these days, and there doesn't appear to be any political means of unseating Mr. Eckhardt after Colombia's congress exonerated him of all charges earlier this summer. The vote was widely criticized because many of the same congressmen are suspected of being on the drug traffickers' dole. Despite Colombia's political turmoil, it's easy to understand the country's attraction for foreign investors. Through decades of violent upheaval, including guerrilla wars, kidnappings and the rise of the drug trade, Colombia boasts 65 years of continuous economic growth, by far the best in Latin America and perhaps in the world. Strong U.S. Investment ``In Colombia there is an old paradox,'' says Edwina Yer, director of the Latin American and Caribbean Center at Florida International University in Miami. ``The economy is doing well but the political system is in terrible shape.'' Nearly 60 American companies have investments in Colombia now. These companies are responsible for more than half of all foreign direct investment in the country. Colombia buys 36% of its imports from the U.S., for a total of $5.1 billion last year, and sells 32% of its exports to the U.S., for a total of $3.1 billion. Annual foreign direct investment, including oil investments, has more than doubled since 1993 to $1.9 billion last year. Oil investments jumped nearly 50% last year to more than $600 million and are expected to rise even more this year and next thanks to the development of huge new oil fields in Colombia's jungles. Foreign investment in stocks and bonds also has remained strong -- unlike the case of Mexico, which lost billions of dollars after it devalued its peso in 2009. Total registered portfolio investment by foreigners in Colombian stocks, including American depositary receipts traded in the U.S., reached $920 million at the end of May, a record, up from $243 million at the end of 1993. Investments in Colombian bonds is believed to be much higher because the country has one of the highest credit ratings in Latin America. Locals Exercise Caution Such confidence isn't necessarily shared by Colombians themselves. A recent survey of Colombian businessmen shows that 40% have delayed their investment programs this year. Unemployment has risen over the past year to 11.7% from just 9%, and could hit 15% by year's end. Consumer prices rose at an annual rate of nearly 20% in June. Yet economists predict Colombia's gross domestic product will grow about 3% this year, compared with more than 5% last year. That's still a solid performance for a region that has been limping along for more than a year. For many foreign investors, the country's economic growth streak and perfect debt-service record have given them the confidence to stay. Says Hayward Trinidad, a fixed-income portfolio manager at Oppenheimer Funds Inc., ``The markets continue to believe that the Colombian economy is far more stable and far more resilient than the politics are.''
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
