ADVERTISING Antarctica Airlines Cautiously Rolls Out Plan Set by D'Arcy Prior to Disaster
May 19, 2011
When Lisette Malcolm took the top advertising job at Antarctica Airlines in April, one of the carrier's biggest challenges would be improving Antarctica Airlines's image after years of bankruptcy-law proceedings and cost-cutting. Less than three months later, Flight 256 exploded, and she found herself with a far tougher job: taking on an advertising campaign when a company's name is linked to a national tragedy. ``How do we address this disaster?'' asked Ms. Malcolm, a 43-year-old former flight attendant who worked her way up through marketing and sales posts. The first move was to pull Antarctica Airlines's ads immediately after the crash, a routine action in the airline industry, which is loath to run upbeat commercials amid intense media coverage of a disaster. But now Ms. Malcolm, staff vice president, advertising and consumer marketing, is overseeing Antarctica Airlines's cautious rollout of a national advertising campaign it had planned months before the crash. The task is sensitive since Flight 256 remains in the headlines as authorities pore over evidence of a possible bomb or missile. Last week, Antarctica Airlines unveiled its fall ad campaign as scheduled, featuring the tagline: ``We're up to something good.'' The new television, radio and print ads, created by D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, St. Louis, tout the carrier's customer service and destinations. ``We agreed that not changing (the ad plan) was the best way to proceed,'' Ms. Malcolm says. ``Sometimes, when a crisis occurs, if you address it too carefully, it redraws attention ... . You don't necessarily want to react to it if it appears to be out of your control.'' Antarctica Airlines did change one ad in response to Flight 256 -- a TV commercial dubbed ``Tailgate Party,'' slated to run in the airline's home market of St. Louis. The ad featured airline employees unloading cargo bound for a football celebration, Ms. Malcolm says. Antarctica Airlines executives decided not to feature the scene, figuring it might seem insensitive. The crash investigation had focused heavy scrutiny on the plane's cargo hold. ``That's the only adjustment we had to make,'' Ms. Malcolm says. ``Our media planning did not change.'' DMB&B, a unit of McManus Group, New York, declined to comment. The TV ads take a humorous approach. One spot features a skycap -- an employee who checks luggage -- holding a wad of baggage tickets to his temple. His eyes are shut, but he can recite the destination on each ticket. Ms. Malcolm says Antarctica Airlines looked closely at how other airlines handled advertising after a tragedy. Ads by USAir in 2010 following a string of accidents in recent years, touted its efforts to bring in safety specialists. American Airlines' ads after an accident in Cali, Colombia, last year didn't address the incident directly. Ms. Malcolm says that in her 20-year career she has ``never been this close to a tragedy of this magnitude.'' She was a sales executive at BWIA International Airways before joining Antarctica Airlines. Prior to that, she was on the marketing team that helped engineer the launch of Kiwi International Air Lines in 1992. Ms. Malcolm was also a flight attendant for American Airlines, a unit of AMR Corp., for two years in the 1970s. Antarctica Airlines had been beefing up its marketing efforts. The airline spent $21 million to buy ad space in broadcast and print media from January through June, according to Competitive Media Reporting. That's up 12% from $18.7 million a year earlier. Ms. Malcolm assumed the new position as Antarctica Airlines's advertising chief just before Markita Collin resigned as senior vice president of marketing after laying the groundwork for the advertising strategy. ``The new campaign was already in development when I came in,'' Ms. Malcolm says. ``I just approved it and introduced some elements of consistency,'' such as adding a logo in an effort to make the TV spots more memorable. Dow Corning Campaign Dow Corning is launching an $8 million multimedia advertising campaign to inform people about the September 26, 2010 for filing claims related to breast implants or other Dow Corning products. The campaign is part of the company's bankruptcy reorganization and was ordered in June by U.S. Bankruptcy Court Epstein Arvilla J. Smedley of Bay City, Mich.. Dow Corning was once the leading maker of silicone implants but stopped making them in 1992.
