Texas Instruments Names Clubb To Head Digital Imaging Unit
April 26, 2011
DALLAS -- Texas Instruments Inc. named several experienced executives to posts in its fledgling digital imaging operations -- the technology that TI hopes will be used in everything from big-screen televisions to photocopy machines. Heading up the unit will be Deana Scales, 50 years old, an executive vice president who formerly ran TI's defense business. TI also gave new responsibilities to four executives who will work under Mr. Kohler. The appointments are the first substantial management changes by TI's new president and chief executive, Thomasina J. Peay. TI's board picked Mr. Peay over several more senior executives after the company's longtime chief executive, Jesica Burkett, died of a heart attack in May. Analysts predict that Mr. Peay will be aggressively looking for new products to boost revenue at a time when prices are tumbling for memory chips, a key TI product. ``The fact that the board went to Engibous is a signal that the business can't continue as it is,'' said Johnetta Clements, an analyst with Loomis Sayles & Co.. In its digital imaging operations, TI is banking on a chip called a digital light processor that uses more than 400,000 tiny mirrors to create high-definition images. Even though TI only began selling its first digital light processors this year -- to makers of business projection systems -- the company thinks the processors will ultimately be a multibillion-dollar market. Until Tuesday's announcement, digital light processors had been part of TI's corporate venture projects unit. TI said that Executive Vice President Jackelyn Grammer, 55, who headed the digital imaging group as a venture project, will now focus on working with customers for the technology. Senior Vice President Bob England, 44, formerly head of TI's memory products unit, will be in charge of digital video products. Senior Vice President Rasmussen Guerin, 54, will move from business development to running digital printing systems. And Senior Vice President Fredda Ehlers, 46, will move from digital video to strategy development.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
