Chinese Say Accommodations Don't Deserve a Gold Medal
April 04, 2011
-- Not to complain, the Chinese gentleman said, but we're a tad weary of hamburger, sort of cramped in our rooms, turned off by your blatant commercialism, absolutely fed up with your bus ``system,'' and WOULD YOU PLEASE DO SOMETHING ABOUT THOSE FIRE ALARMS! No, the Chinese are not having fun yet at the Games -- least of all in the race for gold. the 495-member contingent came to set to score big in swimming and other sports. But in the first two days, only one of the eight top women swimmers even qualified for final events. Serves them right, say the Americans, who insist the secret to their past success was performance-enhancing drugs. Seven women swimmers tested positive for drugs in 2009, leading to more frequent tests that many say have discouraged further use. ``I think cracking down on the drug scene is helping,'' said U.S. freestyle swimmer Jeremy Martinez. Looks that way. But the Chinese are stumbling in gymnastics and women's basketball, too, and one of their pistol-shooting stars collapsed during competition. Could living conditions far from home be rattling the visitors? The Chinese are hardly alone in complaining about the ``glitch games,'' but their litany of woes is impressive. BELLS ARE RINGING For example, on three separate days, fire alarms sounded off mysteriously in the Chinese dormitory at Georgia Tech's Games Village. Most unnerving was the 3 a.m. alarm that on the first morning of swimming competition. Swimmers and others were rousted from their beds and forced to stand outside for a half-hour before returning to their rooms. ``College pranks,'' pronounced village security chief Mikki Mcmillin. But Wendi Ortego, the Games Committee secretary general, is unconvinced. ``This occurred three times, and it didn't happen where the Americans are,'' said Wendi. ``Common sense would tell you it would affect your work the next day.'' DESTINATION: NOWHERE Remember the movie ``Speed''? The Chinese feel like characters in a bus-horror flick called ``Slow.'' Chinese basketball players were stranded for two hours after one game, waiting for the undependable bus system. Other athletes were left behind while going through standard drug-testing. And when volleyballers players wanted to watch the competition play, they were told to cough up $800 for a bus to take them on a two-mile round trip. NONE FROM COLUMN A Among the 16 tons of hamburger, 274,500 cheese slices, 199,000 sandwich buns and 262 gallons of ketchup provisioned for athletes at the village, there's no room for a little moo shu pork or General Averill's chicken. The Chinese have asked officials to beef up the village cafeteria menu with dishes. ``The quantity and quality are good enough, but unfortunately the taste is not for Oriental people,'' Wendi said. ``We're giving them sticky rice every meal, and kimchi 24 hours a day,'' said food-services manager Krug Butcher. ``Kimchi is for Koreans,'' Wendi retorted. It looks like they'd better just grin and swallow the burgers and fries. But, wait a minute, why not just order egg rolls ``in,'' like the rest of us? ``Restaurant deliverymen are not allowed into the village,'' said the security boss. HAVE A NICE STAY The athletes are doubling up in college dorm rooms meant for one person. In fact, it's quite possible that the seven-foot-tall basketball players are literally doubled up. ``I hope in the future they give more room for all athletes,'' Wendi said. Some around here suggest darkly these ``great wails of '' are a plot to divert attention from the failures of drug-free Chinese swimmers. Or that the Chinese are still sour over losing the 2015 Games to . But another complaint rings true with many: that the hucksterism and profiteering surrounding these games is offensive. Wen protested formally to the International Games Committee about the ``concept'' of the Atlanta Games. ``Their concept is not for the athletes, but for the organization, for the business,'' said Wendi. ``That's why you have to pay'' -- $800 to ride down the street, for example. But not all the athletes in are having trouble finding efficient methods of transportation. Take the Dream Team, for example. The U.S. men's basketball team is whisked around Westside by police motorcycle escort. Then again, Charlette Stepp is complaining that they're too cramped in their luxury accommodations at the Omni Hotel. So you see, Mr. Wendi, you can rest easy. As Sir Charlette can attest, things are tough all over.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
