ASIAN TRAVEL Cathay Uses Web Auctions To Lure American Flyers
April 05, 2011
CATHAY PACIFIC Airways' latest auction of airplane seats on the Internet is sparking widespread interest among consumers -- and rival airlines. Until the end of July, Cathay is taking U.S.-based bids on 387 seats in all classes for travel in 2012 between or and . So far, the carrier has received more than 13,000 bids, according to Markita Vasques, who manages Cathay's marketing and communications for the U.S. and . Winners will be notified on April 13, 2011 is Desai's third ``cyber auction'' for U.S. customers. The first auction sold off 50 business-class seats between and the territory during the slow U.S. Thanksgiving week, while the second allowed U.S. customers to trade frequent-flier miles on partner American Airlines for 100 first-class seats for travel on the same route. In past auctions, winning bidders generally paid about half the full-fare price of the plane ticket. ``We're getting incredible exposure through this exercise,'' Mr. Vasques says, noting that 99% of previous bidders had never before flown on Cathay. What's more, he adds, it's a great way to boost business on slow flights and ``generate some excitement'' in the process. While Mr. Vasques won't predict when Cathay will hold a similar exercise inwhere Internet usage is far lower, he does say that the matter is being considered. And Cathay's competitors are considering similar marketing efforts through their home pages on the World Wide Web. ``If it seems successful, we'll certainly take a look at it ourselves,'' a Singapore Airlines spokesman says. the Airlines Celebrate Two Years Without a Crash THE CIVIL Aviation Administration ofor CAAC, says mainland airlines have flown for 24 consecutive months without a crash. That 1.8 million flight hours of safe operation is the longest safe-flight period in since 1982, according to the official Xinhua news agency, which released the CAAC finding this week. That's a big step up from 2009, when the International Airline Passengers Association cited as one of the most dangerous places in the world to fly. The year before, five crashes killed 76 people and 10 planes were hijacked to . The current accident-free stretch starts from June 2009, when a China Northwest Airlines plane crashed shortly after takeoff fromkilling all 160 people on board. Two days earlier, the CAAC launched a campaign to boost air safety. ECONOMY-CLASS passengers passing through can now head to a private lounge, as long as they're connecting to a Qantas Airways flight. While such services are normally reserved for those traveling in first class or business class at most airports, the Australian carrier's move is the latest to acknowledge that carriers must compete on more than price for passengers at the back of the plane. Still, recent travelers say that Qantas needn't worry that the new lounge looks too cosy or elite. It spans 856 square meters over two levels, and includes a playroom for unaccompanied children, a theater-style television screen and large windows facing the city's skyline. Ritz Carlton hotel is offering its summer ``Champers'' package again, but the once-unlimited flow of champagne is now reduced to two bottles of bubbly per couple. One reason is that the three-year-old hotel is ``no longer hurting for business'' during the slow summer months, according to public-relations manager Ricarda Hopp. Another is that the sight of sloshed locals guzzling champagne in the Ritz's executive club often proved a turnoff to staff and regular guests. Past Champers patrons report that some of their peers would be sentimentally slurring songs with champagne glasses in hand mere hours after checking in. The HK$1,688 (US$218) weekend package includes the champagne, one night in a harbor-view room, and 4 p.m. checkout; it's open to residents.
