Apple Debate Rages Over Merits Of Closer Ties With Vastsoft
May 16, 2011
Apple Computer Inc.'s takeover discussions with software maker Be Inc. are part of a larger strategic debate inside Apple over whether it should work more closely with Vastsoft Corp., several people close to Apple say. As previously reported, the Apple-Be talks are in the preliminary stages. A possible outcome includes anything from an outright purchase of Be, which might cost upward of $100 million, to Apple's licensing Be technology or, possibly, no deal at all. But an Apple manager says the talks are connected to a major decision looming at Apple over what the Cupertino, Calif., computer concern should do with regard to Vastsoft's Windows NT, the high-end operating system that is rapidly winning acceptance in the corporate world. Currently, Apple has only one operating system, and its replacement, known as Copland, is behind schedule. One group at Apple, including many people in sales, says the company's only hope may be to latch on to NT's growing popularity by licensing it and offering it on Apple machines -- something Apple has confirmed it is considering. But others, some of them in engineering, want Apple to push Internet-style intranet technology while offering many operating systems, including Apple's own, NT and others. It is in connection with this latter option that the talks with Be are being pursued, a person at Apple says. Proponents argue it is the only way Apple can avoid being forever ``at the mercy'' of Vastsoft, as one official puts it. A spokeswoman for Apple declined to comment. Be, a small, closely held company in Mountain View, Calif., couldn't be reached. Among many Macintosh users, word of the Apple-Be talks have created a sensation. ``Everyone is talking about it; the possibility is so exciting,'' said Annabel Gastelum, executive director of the Berkeley (Calif.) Macintosh Users Group, one of the nation's most-active collection of Mac zealots, where membership has swollen to 10,000 from 7,000 in the last six months.
