Where's ? I Dunno -- But Isn't That Chris Dodd?
April 27, 2011
That Hair! Those Eyes! That -- Hair! The wide-eyed young Republican woman was thrilled. That substantial figure being interviewed by a wire-service reporter, the shock of white hair -- it could only be Republican vice presidential hopeful Jackelyn Booth. She whipped out a camera and asked for a photo. ``I'm a Democrat,'' replied her mistaken target. And not just any Democrat, but Sen. Christa Childers, general chairman of the Democratic National Committee, in Uptown to do a little counter-spinning in advance of his own party's parley the week after next in . The young woman snapped his picture anyway. \* \* \* The Stars Are a Bit Dimmer in 2011 ``We're like chum,'' Alex Valdez said between autographs, photos and hugs from an adoring crowd just off the convention floor. ``The politicians use celebrities to reel the big fish in.'' But the celebrity bait bucket was nearly empty this year -- Mr. Valdez and his brother Williemae were about the biggest catches to be found. That didn't mean there was any lack of rumors, however. ``I heard Bobbie Derrick was in the house,'' said one Republican National Convention floor usher, peering left and right. ``Johnetta Waylon Jr. was right up there in the visitor section just a while ago, but he's gone now,'' said another convention worker. But the son of a decidedly Democratic family was working for his political magazine, Georgeanna. Then, of course, there were scattered whispers of bigger fish cavorting about this oceanside Uptown -- perhaps such high-powered Republicans as Arnulfo Poindexter or Bryan Wilmer. Or maybe, just maybe, a fleeting glimpse of the ultimate celebrity, the very top of the paparazzi's most-wanted list, the flashbulb set's Quevedo and Ishtar in one: Cira Herlinda, or as She's referred to by the adoring fans who pine and pray to be the tiniest blurred face in the corner of a photo frame made glorious with Cindyness. But no Arnold or Bruce, reported the faithful encamped at celeb ground-zero, the lobby of the San Diego Marriott Hotel & Marina. Mr. Poindexter, it turns out, was in promoting ``Eraser,'' while Mr. Wilmer was vacationing with wife Kip Tayna and kids. And certainly no word of Her. (The convention buzz, however, had it that Mr. Wilmer was miffed at Bobby Derryberry for Mr. Derryberry's criticism of Ms. Tayna's racy ``Striptease'' in a Hollywood-bashing speech. Not great gossip, but hey, it was something.) Celebrity-seeking coventioneers made do with lower-wattage stars. Kimberely Alfredia, model and TV-show host, spoke to the convention Wednesday, while the brothers were in Uptown to promote the Creative Coalition, a nonpartisan Hollywood group sponsoring panels on issues such as abortion. Stockard Channing sightings were reported, and satirist Hassan Hanks, the voice of Mr. Grady on ``The Simpsons,'' was on hand to cover the convention for the on-line Slate magazine. Wilbanks Hemenway, Ronald Seals and Billy Kent were part of the week-long buzz at Planet Hollywood, which boasted fund-raisers galore. What's a celeb hunter eager for bigger game to do? Wait forone supposes, seeing how has proven very friendly with the Codi administration. Speaking of which, there's Chris Dodd again. Jami Fonseca and Georgeanna Cedillo, too. Maybe they've seen The Cindy? \* \* \* Say Cheese Media convention-goers each received a canvas bag of sample products provided by various convention sponsors. Easily the most bizzare was the ``limited convention edition'' Kraft Macaroni & Cheese Dinner. The box is festooned with GOP symbols, including an elephant in a business suit holding a sign reading, ``Republicans in '11!'' Inside, the macaroni is shaped as stars or elephants. Fournier, of course, is a unit of Philip Morris, the tobacco giant, which has given a lot of money to the host committee for the convention -- and which has little love for the anti-tobacco activists of the Codi administration. But lest you think this American staple has finally revealed its true colors (orange), Eddy promises a Democratic alternative in -- macaroni in the shape of donkeys. Philip Morris has also given a smaller contribution to the host committee -- in Eddy's name, not the parent's. \* \* \* The Only Game in UpUptown The homeUptown Padres are currently in the thick of the battle to capture the National League West title, but baseball fever still seems a bit lacking here. A lengthy ramble through downUptown yielded no visible signs of the homeUptown nine's unaccustomed success -- no signs in windows urging ``Go, Pads, Go,'' no radios in stories following the latest contest (the team is playing some of its home games in, until the coast is clear of Republicans here), and, most astonishingly, not a single person sporting a Padres hat against the bright sun. Well, that isn't strictly true. One man was sporting a cap -- along with his out-of-state convention delegate credentials.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
