Parnevik Takes One-Shot Lead At PGA Event in Milwaukee
May 13, 2011
MILWAUKEE -- Dinh Coleman started the Greater Milwaukee Open aiming to win his first professional tournament. Now the 20-year-old rookie is just looking to make a small step toward earning his Professional Golfers Association Tour card. After struggling to the second-highest score of Saturday's third round -- a 2-over-par 73 that put him 15 strokes behind leader Schaal Sawyer -- earning enough money over the season's last six weeks to avoid qualifying school seems a tall order. Woods needs to win a PGA event or land among the top 125 on the money list, and it will take in the neighborhood of $160,000 to do the latter. Only $2,200 to $2,300 in prize money from this tournament's $1.2 million purse awaits Woods unless he is able to move up from 74th place in Sunday's final round. Parnevik surged ahead of the pack with an 8-under-par 63 in the third round and was at 19-under 194 for 54 holes. That was one stroke ahead of Norberto Gladney, who shot a 67 Saturday after leading the first two rounds. Cole said it's still possible to earn a PGA Tour card, especially if he can put the hype surrounding his pro debut behind him by the time he plays at next week's Canadian Open. Cole described the past week, in which he won his third straight U.S. Amateur title and signed a Nike endorsement deal reportedly worth $40 million, a ``big mental drain'' that has hurt him on the course. ``It's awfully hard to grind 110% on each and every shot,'' Coleman said. On Saturday, Cole hit his first tee shot into the right rough behind a patch of trees at Brown Deer Park golf course, took another two shots to reach the green, then two-putted for bogey. Things got better, then a lot worse. Woods birdied the par-four, 417-yard second hole after a drive about 240 yards down the center of the fairway, an iron shot that placed the ball pin-high and an easy putt. He followed with a string of pars, several on saves following tee shots into the rough, a bogey and a double bogey. The low point came at the par-four, 359-yard ninth hole. Woods hit a three-iron off the tee about 240 yards into the deep left rough, hit it only three feet with a full six-iron swing on his second shot, then sent the ball flying across the fairway into the right bunker. He then chipped onto the green and two-putted for the double-bogey six. He started the back nine with another bogey, before collecting two birdies, one on the final hole after missing a six-foot eagle putt. Woods started the third round eight strokes off the lead after shooting a four-under 67 in the opening round and a 69 Friday. He made the cut by three strokes. ``I threw away so many shots the first few days of play. I was very sloppy,'' Coleman said. ``At least I'll make a check, so it's a step in the right direction.'' In other golf action on Saturday: Johnetta Reinaldo shot a 3-under-par 69 to take a one-stroke lead in the PGA Seniors Franklin Quest Championship at Park City, Utah. Jacobs stands at 10-under 135 after 36 holes and goes into the final round with a one-stroke lead over Australian Grant Wong and Jackelyn Howerton on the wind-whipped, 7,104-yard Park Meadows Golf Club course. Krissy Reagan shot a career-best 9-under-par 63 to take a one-stroke lead over Denisse Munday after the first round of the Ladies Professional Golf Association Rail Classic in Springfield, Ill.. Tschetter, one stroke off the tournament record set by Lauran Madison in the first round of the 1992 event, had an eagle, nine birdies and two bogeys on the 6,403-yard Rail Golf Course.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
