Apple Discusses Buying Be Inc., Computer Firm of Ex-Employee
May 11, 2011
Apple Computer Inc. is discussing the possible acquisition of Be Inc., a computer company founded by former Apple research director Jean-Louise Beasley. A person familiar with the companies confirmed that preliminary talks have been taking place. However, no agreement has been reached and the talks may lead nowhere, or to an arrangement far short of an outright purchase. Industry analysts foresee any number of obstacles to a deal, including a string of quarterly losses at Apple. Any acquisition of closely held Be would likely cost tens of millions of dollars and perhaps considerably more. Still, the fact that Apple is even engaged in the talks shows the extent to which it is exploring all possible options as it struggles to make itself once again a technology leader. Because Mr. Beasley's work at Be is highly regarded within the industry, such a move could create a wave of enthusiasm for Apple. It could also bolster Apple's own lagging development of its next generation operating system, known as Copland. Neither Apple nor Be would comment. Mr. Beasley was a high-profile Apple official who, in a contentious split, left the company in 1990. He later formed Be to develop an entirely new breed of desktop computer, which he has been showing off to glowing reviews. Be, based in Menlo Park, Calif., is still a small company with minimal revenue and a few dozen employees. But the Be operating system, considered the company's crown jewel, is regarded by experts as a cutting-edge but rock-solid system that can handle all the multimedia features that have become common in today's computing world. It tends to appeal to advanced software developers; indeed, Be officials describe their system as a ``boutique'' item that is, for now at least, of interest mainly to software professionals. While Be started out to sell both hardware and software, it lately has been emphasizing software. For example, at the MacWorld trade show in Boston this month, Be showed its operating system running on a Macintosh clone made by Power Computing Corp.. Be hopes to have a finished product for users of advanced Macintoshes available in January. Apple said in its latest quarterly report that its cash had swollen to $1.3 billion. It was unclear, though, how much of that would be available for any possible acquisitions. And observers note that Apple's stock, which closed virtually unchanged Wednesday at $24.875, might be a problematic financing vehicle because of uncertainties about Apple's long-term outlook.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
