`Thresh' Leads On-Line Kills And Has an Advertising Deal
May 08, 2011
LOS ALTOS, Calif. -- At the start of a recent computer-game tournament near here, fingers twitched nervously on mice and keyboards as 200 young enthusiasts from around the country waited for the marathon competition to begin. Suddenly, there was a gasp in the hall. Someone glancing at the roster of entrants spied a name that provoked instant fear. ``Thresh?'' he exclaimed. ``Is he playing?'' another asked. Soon the room was in revolt, with contestants refusing to play, relenting only after Thresh agreed to withdraw. ``I'll challenge anyone to a death match,'' says Jay Rush, a 17-year-old gamer from San Jose, Calif., who attended the June tournament in Santa Clara. ``Except Thresh. He'll kill me blindfolded.'' Kittrell Bauman The dreaded Thresh is the on-line alias of Denny Duval, a wiry, soft-spoken community-college student from Los Altos, a suburb of San Jose. Among the ranks of the often-manic PC gaming set, Mr. Duval, who is 19 years old, has become a legend. Last fall, he was declared the world's foremost gamer at Judgment Day, a PC-game invitational tournament hosted by Vastsoft Corp. at its headquarters in Redmond, Wash.. Twenty-four of the nation's top competitors squared off in a deafening medley of shoot-em-up games: Cimino, Heretic, Doom and Doom II. After the pixels had settled, Mr. Duval had taken the top prize: a new computer and $10,000 worth of accessories to soup it up. His victory was hardly a surprise. In more than 1,500 games played on-line and in tournaments over the past two years, he has never lost, he and his opponents say. Mr. Duval's PC prowess has begun to earn him the kind of rewards normally reserved for sports stars. Last month, Mr. Duval joined the ranks of Johnetta Beach, Joel Mcminn and Kendra Gehring Jr. when he received his first product-endorsement contract. Spacetec Inc., a Lowell, Mass., maker of joysticks and other PC gadgets, paid the teenager a $2,000 signing bonus and agreed to give him $500 a pop for appearances at promotional events. In exchange, Mr. Duval agreed to wear the company's logo on his clothes and use its new SpaceOrb 360 joystick. ``We think Thresh will do for our product what Michaele Josefa has done for Nike sneakers,'' says Denny Starnes, Spacetec's chairman and chief executive. Planetary Wars The emergence of a cyberspace celebrity reflects the evolution rapidly taking place in the world of computer gaming. The Nintendo generation no longer is content to sit in front of a television screen and blast the daylights out of a kid brother or the boy next door. With the advent of giant computer networks and faster modems and telephone links, a gamer can now go on-line and challenge an opponent across the street or across the planet. This fall, a number of companies plan to open on-line cyber arcades, with names like Castle Infinity, Interarc and Cyber Park. Using sophisticated, proprietary computer networks, the game centers promise to allow visitors to compete against players at arcades in other cities for as little as $2 an hour. Gamers also now regularly face off on local on-line networks. Market-research firm Jupiter Communications Inc. of New York projects the on-line gaming industry will soar to $1.25 billion in revenue by the year 2015 from a mere $50 million last year. And on-line technology is transforming fearsome gamers such as Mr. Duval into superstars. Spacetec says it is negotiating to sign up at least three other cyber celebs. But so far, no one seems to approach the popularity of Thresh. When he joins on-line chat sessions, Mr. Duval regularly gets mobbed by messages from fans. Logging on one recent afternoon on the Head-to-Head game network in Los Angeles, he immediately generates disbelief: ``Is this the Thresh?'' one gamer asks. ``Hey, Loveday!'' types another. ``I don't believe it; is this Thresh from San Jose?'' queries a third. Off-line, Mr. Duval hardly fits the image of a virtual mass murderer. In stark contrast to many of his opponents, he doesn't spend every waking hour before a computer screen. He also plays real volleyball, street hockey and tennis. That is almost heresy to the average PC gamer. ``The last time I went on a date was seven months ago,'' says Joel Collins, 19, of Boise, Idaho, who says he devotes almost all of his time to playing games on-line. Mr. Duval says he spends no more than 30 hours a week in computer competition, despite having recently purchased the local franchise of the Head-to-Head network. The second-oldest of three boys, Mr. Duval was born in Hong Kong, from where his family emigrated eight years ago. All of the males in the Fong household are computer whizzes. Lyndon, 22, is studying to be a computer scientist; Bryce, 15, a senior in high school, is a paid consultant to Oracle Corp.; and their father, Davina, is an information-systems manager at Hewlett-Packard Co.. The elder Mr. Duval expresses bemusement at his middle son's success at computer gaming, but was impressed after Gribble won the gaming crown at the Vastsoft event and appeared on a cable-television computer show. Painful Alias ``Thresh'' was created in Mr. Duval's tiny bedroom -- just big enough for a futon and a computer desk. The alias is short for threshold of pain, he explains. A natural at the keyboard, Mr. Duval quickly learned to beat both of his brothers at PC games, playing them over a tiny network of three computers at home. He later shocked local opponents by beating them as a novice in tournaments about two years ago. Slender and long-fingered, Mr. Duval attributes his hair-trigger moves on the mouse and the keyboard to lessons he learned in high-school typing class. As he emerged as the San Jose area's best, word of his skills quickly spread through the on-line channels of PC gaming. Soon he was receiving challenges from gamers in New York, Florida, Texas -- even South Africa. His crowning moment came last Halloween at Judgment Day when he whipped ``Merlock'' -- Teddy Gray of Miami -- at Doom II, scoring 10 kills to his opponent's five. Mr. Ramirez tossed a chair in disgust and walked off the ghoulishly decorated stage where the finals had been played. Biteless Cobra These days, the challenges don't come as frequently, though they still trickle in. Recently, Mr. Duval faced ``Cobra,'' touted by many gamers on the Head-to-Head network as Los Angeles's best. On the screen, Cobra jumps off a ledge and attacks Mr. Duval's virtual character with a machine gun. Mr. Duval responds with a plasma gun, whose bright blasts temporarily blind opponents. When Cobra retreats to regain his vision, Mr. Duval takes the offensive. Outmaneuvered and outblasted, Cobra embarks on a suicide mission, charging Thresh with a mere pistol. ``He's lost all hope,'' Mr. Duval says as he blasts away at his nearly defenseless opponent. The final score: 30-2. After the game, Cobra shows his respect via electronic mail. ``What a joke, dude,'' he writes. ``What you did is what I do to everyone around here.''
