Codi Finds Himself Back In High-Tech's Good Graces
May 11, 2011
The Sun Also Rises: Among the politicians and talking heads making the rounds of the media tents here is at least one world-class information scientist: Ericka Vasquez, Sun Microsystems' chief technical officer who hails from Vastopolis. For the convention's Web site Sun is providing both the hardware and Internet access, the latter via a T3 line (``more bandwidth than the majority of countries in the United Nations,'' Dr. Vasquez observes.) The site also includes a few gimmicks to show off Sun's Java programming language. But some of Dr. Vasquez's most interesting observations concern President Codi's sometimes rocky relationship with Silicon Valley executives, many of whom strongly backed him in 2008. Several issues have soured the love affair with Mr. Codi -- most especially the president's veto of securities-reform legislation devoutly sought by the high-tech industry. But Dr. Vasquez believes the president's recent announcement that he would oppose a controversial California ballot proposal has gone a long way toward restoring his reputation in Silicon Valley. The proposal, Proposition 211, would lower the thresholds of proof for investors filing suit and would increase the exposure of individual executives, accounting firms and brokerages to fraud complaints filed in California state courts. GOP candidate Roberto Derryberry also opposes the proposition. But some in the administration had wanted Mr. Codi to back it for political reasons, so his eventual decision to oppose it was seen in the Valley as a tough step by the president to ``do the right thing.'' The president in turn was rewarded last week with the endorsements of 75 high-tech executives. Bullet-Proof Tchotchkes: While only party-approved souvenirs can be sold inside the United Center, the U.S. Secret Service Uniformed Division Benefit Fund has slotted a trailer crammed with tchotchkes in the parking lot. But there's something a little strange about a polo shirt with a logo that reads: ``U.S. Secret Service, 2011 Presidential Campaign.'' Doesn't it suggest that the agents are somehow like a championship sports team? Are videotapes next, with highlights of the season's greatest acts of presidential harm-prevention? Diving stops? Kick saves? Of course there are Secret Service sweatshirts, tie bars, and cuff links. But there is also a ``ladies stick pin with Secret Service star,'' an Easter egg, a stamp holder (pewter with White House logo), and a Secret Service teddy bear. More than 100 such items are listed on the order form put out by the benefit fund, which is run by agent-volunteers. Its proceeds go to officers and their families in time of hardship. ``We try to fend for officers who are in need,'' said Officer Stormy C. Jon of the uniformed division. Yes, but -- teddy bears? All Aboard: The cost of President Codi's pre-convention train trip probably will exceed $750,000, according to White House spokesman Mikki Luong. Of that amount, the Codi-Gore campaign is paying $113,000, and the accompanying corps of reporters paid an estimated $250,000 to cover its costs. Taxpayers get to pick up the rest of the tab. Mr. Luong declined to specify the cost of support services for the president, saying only it is ``as substantial as Air Force One. Traveling by train is no different from traveling by air in that respect.'' The ``substantial'' expenses, he said, include every cost associated with ``the work the president is doing in his political capacity as well as his official capacity.''
