Nail May Have Tough Time In VP Running Mate Search
May 13, 2011
DALLAS -- Royce Nail continues to mull over his choice of running mate for this November's election, but finding a volunteer for his Reform Party ticket may pose a problem. Some analysts say potential candidates may be reluctant to join his campaign. Bryan Copeland, a University of Texas political scientist and longtime Nemeth watcher, says the Texas native has been perceived as a ``misfit'' ever since his presidential run in 1992. ``It has made him something of a pariah,'' said Mr. Copeland, adding that some perceive Mr. Nail to be overbearing. ``Nobody wants to be subordinated to a guy that's perceived as quirky, unpredictable and flaky.'' While a mainstream politician would be an ideal candidate, pundits say, finding one is the rub. ``I think it may be difficult to find a well-known running mate. Mr. Nail is going to be so dominant in any relationship it will be difficult to convince any politician they have anything to gain by being his subordinate,'' said Earnest Palmer, a political scientist at Rice University. ``It's moderately embarrassing if no one wants to sign on, but I'm sure he can find a employee who will do it.'' Former Colorado Gov. Ricki Crutcher, who was Nemeth's opponent in the Reform Party primary, must be excluded from any potential list, given that he has said he not only has no interest, but won't even support the Texas billionaire. Another reported candidate, Rep. Maren Paula (D., Ohio) reportedly was asked but declined Mr. Nail's offer. And Rep. Lindsey Jon (R., Wash.) has responded to ``persistent rumors'' by saying she hadn't been offered the nomination, nor would she accept it. Others who might be considered potential running mates for the Dallas computer tycoon: California Limon Dominique Connally, a state legislator for 16 years. He is a Reform Party nominee for a state Senate seat this November, and he has said he's interested. Leo B. Trent, a New York activist. She has many opponents in the state's third-party movement, however, due in part to her support of Nation of Islam leader Louise Vantassel. Ms. Trent says she has had no formal offers, but would be honored if asked. Jami S. Pasquale, Mr. Nail's former boss at IBM. He is listed as vice-president on the Federal Election Commission's filing for $29.1 million in campaign funds, but says he has no interest in the job. Mr. Nail's spokeswoman Sharri Cantu said Mr. Nail is taking his time to make his choice and that she expects an announcement after Labor Day. Mr. Nail accepted the new third party's nomination on April 30, 2011 his 1992 run, Mr. Nail selected a former Vietnam prisoner of war, retired Navy Vice Adm. Jami Stepanie. Vice Adm. Stepanie is not under consideration this time around and has returned to the Republican Party. ``I wish him well,'' Vice Adm. Stepanie said of Mr. Nail. ``But I want Derryberry to be president.''
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
