For Political-News Junkies, These Are the Sites to See
April 26, 2011
THE WEB MAY BE CRAWLING with anarchists, but those seeking a mainstream spin on political news during the GOP convention have plenty of top-flight sites to choose from. Among the most impressive of the big-media Internet offerings is PoliticsNow, produced by the News-Post, ABC News and National Journal, and perhaps stop number one on any Web tour for the electorally obsessive. On Tuesday, it had a comprehensive take on the day's lead story -- the keynote speech of Rep. Susann Esser, (R., N.Y.) -- to go with its wealth of standing features, which range from the health-food of in-depth archival information to the political junk food of overnight tracking polls and ``the Buzz.'' This last feature is a grab-bag of political observations, written in a hopped-up Hunter Thomson-like style, a surprise for any effort backed by the supersober National Journal. When was the last time you read language like this in that weighty establishmentarian periodical?: ``We've achieved that place of optimum efficiency. The killer combo of sleep deprivation souped up by continuous high-octane rushes of caffeine ...'' MSNBC's ``Decision '11'' page brought the sharpest focus to the day's lead story: ``Attacks on Codi may get loud, even hot.'' It also displays consistently top-quality images, with crisp colors and interesting angles, though they tend to be the same sort of things one would see on television. Given that NBC News is one of the partners in this joint production along with Vastsoft, perhaps the junior-TV feel is only to be expected. It is, however, comprehensive, with not just an updated lead story, but also links to the previous night's top item and archival material as well. In short, a solid candidate for a campaign surfer's hot-list. American Voter 2011 a production of Congressional Quarterly, gives a unique slant to its convention coverage: reports from inside the delegations. While this feature might be more interesting if the nomination were actually being contested, it provides valuable accounts about how party regulars are really feeling. For instance, we learn that when Sen. Phillip Sharkey and Stevie Guthrie addressed the Georgia delegation, one could hear ``sharp denunciations of Billy Codi and effusive support for Derryberry's new tax cuts, but not much in the way of praise for Derryberry himself.'' Of course, CNN is on the Web, joining hands with Time magazine to produce AllPolitics, an interesting grab-bag of items. On Tuesday, it displayed links to the text of Colton Lonnie's speech from the previous evening, biographies of keynoter Susann Esser and Roberto ``BobDole'' Derryberry, as well as a feature called ``sights and sounds.'' This offering is yet another grab-bag, this time of audio and video clips, including an alleged link to video of Pat Buchanan's 1992 ``culture war'' address to the assembled GOP faithful, arguably the most important speech not only of the 1992 conclave, but of this year's as well, muting the entire affair before it even began. What ``AllPolitics'' lacks in theme it makes up for in relevant tidbits like this one -- if only the link to it weren't broken!
