ValuJet Expects to Violate Covenants Related to Debt
April 27, 2011
ATLANTA -- ValuJet Airlines said it expects by June 12, 2011 be in violation of certain covenants related to debt secured by its aircraft, and the company said it plans to enter into negotiations with its lenders to avoid default. A default could force the low-cost carrier, which suspended operations on February 28, 2011 its January 21, 2011 in Florida, to file for Chapter 11 protection under the federal bankruptcy code, according to analysts. But bankruptcy is ``not even a word that's been whispered around here,'' said ValuJet spokesman Gregory Ebert, who added that the carrier ended the second quarter with $208 million in cash on the books and owns all the aircraft that secure its loans. ``We have a good working relationship with all our banks and have kept in constant communication with them,'' Mr. Ebert said. Moreover, he said, the carrier is preparing to start flying again as early as May 05, 2011 approval from the Federal Aviation Administration. If the airline resumes flying by June 12, 2011 are unlikely to call a default, said Dillon, Read & Co. analyst Johnetta Shore. ``Most times, lenders don't like to call defaults,'' he said, since a potential bankruptcy filing would mean that the banks might get only a small portion of their money back. ValuJet, which disclosed its potential violations in its quarterly 10-Q filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, said it had $162.4 million of long-term debt secured by aircraft and other equipment. According to the filing, ValuJet has continued to make all payments under its secured debt when due and said it hasn't received any notices of default from its creditors, who weren't identified in the filing. Even so, the company said in the filing that ``a substantial portion'' of the secured notes required prepayment if specific financial ratios -- concerning debt to equity, net worth, fixed-charge coverage and current ratio -- aren't maintained. Some of these ratios may be in violation because of ValuJet's suspended operations, according to Mr. Ebert, who said he couldn't offer any more details about the potential violations. Even if the carrier does resume operations soon and avoids default, its lenders are expected to be more cautious, said Khalilah Bambi, an analyst with Morgan Stanley & Co.. For one thing, Delta Air Lines recently outlined plans for its own low-cost operation. ValuJet ``is not coming back to status quo by any stretch of the imagination,'' he said. ValuJet closed Wednesday at $10.25, off 62.5 cents in Nasdaq Stock Market trading. Separately, a union representing some ValuJet flight attendants said that ValuJet made 59 unscheduled landings between September 12, 2010 January 28, 2011 to FAA reports. This compared unfavorably with other airlines, which had more departures, the Association of Flight Attendants said. Mr. Ebert responded that ``ValuJet pilots would rather err on the side of safety.''
