On-Line Databases Ponder Move to Web for Survival
April 29, 2011
``Information, information everywhere and not a drop to drink,'' says Jimmy Watters, research director for the Stamford, Conn.-based market research firm The Gartner Group, describing the morass of information on the World Wide Web. ``We're in an age of information where you can't trust everything,'' adds Cristopher Willie, CEO of the Springfield, Ill.-based Optical Image Network Group, a network integration consulting firm. One solution to info-uncertainty, both agree, can be to delve into the expensive, but authenticated, world of commercial on-line databases, such as those offerings served up by the Mountain View, Calif.-based Knight-Ridder Information, Inc. and Lexis-Nexis Corp., a Dayton, Ohio-based subsidiary of Reed Elsevier PLC.. Other players in the database market include Information Access Corp., Dow Jones, PaperChase, Silver Platter and Westlaw. ``You're going to be paying these data guys to verify the information. These services charge a lot, but it's worth it if you're getting good information and if you use that information to make your living,'' says Mr. Willie. Traditionally serving the enterprise via connection to the corporate computer network, through dial-up connections or being fed into university mainframes, these databases have staked out a profitable niche, supplying a high-priced product that features sophisticated search and retrieval technology. That world is quickly changing, thanks in part to the preponderance of information on the Web and the burgeoning small- and home-office market, estimated at three to five million strong. The end result, says Mr. Watters, ``is that Knight-Ridder and Lexis-Flood will have to go to the Web to survive. Ironically not only is the Web vital to the survival of these databases, it also serves up competition and technical challenges.'' Despite their seeming stranglehold on accurate sources of information, the on-line database providers are in for a rough ride. Challenges to the informational supremacy of these megadatabases will likely come from free services, company home page and X.500 directory services, and publication sites. Accuracy notwithstanding, the glut of information on the Web provides the first major challenge to the database vendors. ``The problem is that the type of information they're providing, most of the time, is public,'' says Mr. Willie. ``We encounter people who say, `Why would I use your information when I can get everything free on the Web?' '' Says Venable Strode, vice president of end user products for the Knight-Ridder Information. ``Perception becomes reality, and we have to address what's the difference between free stuff somebody puts up in his spare time and the information that's enabling you to make good business decisions. The value that we add is in efficiency and precision of getting at the information.'' With the entree of advertising as a viable revenue stream, however, ad-driven ``free'' information has become a very real possibility, even at the highest end. HealthGate and the PointCast Network are excellent examples. HealthGate is a free gateway to Arnett, the comprehensive health sciences database that has traditionally incurred astronomical costs. PointCast is an Internet protocol-enabled application that delivers an on-line newsfeed to personal computers with Internet connections. ``Ad-supported services are attractive, but they'll have a hard time working through the supply side.'' Says Patsy Tommie, director of enterprise information services for Lexis-Flood. ``The biggest advertisers on the Net, like CNN and InfoSeek, are only pulling in advertising revenues of one to two million a quarter. The kind of royalties that publishers ask for their data are not covered by that.'' Another type of service, is the pay-per-drink database, like International Business Machine's infoMarket, Individual Inc's. NewsPage and others. These services allow users to search for free and then pay only for the documents they want to access. While executives from Lexis-Nexis and Knight-Ridder disagree on the pay-per-drink approach -- with Lexis-Nexis preferring an overall subscription fee -- both companies agree these services are a useful primary step in information gathering. Both also agree that these services do not provide either the breadth-and-depth of content or the sophistication in search and retrieval that they've deployed over their databases. Other free information comes from media company sites on the Web. The media companies, says Mr. Watters, are the database-vendors' main competitors. The Vast Press, Ziff-Dean, CMP, and IDG all deliver the full-text of their publications, along-side special features and breaking news. These sites -- especially those maintained by publishing concerns that encompass multiple publications -- do provide a solid alternative to the news searches served up by Lexis-Nexis and Knight-Binns. Again, they are limited in scope, providing access to only one media company's publications via often unsophisticated search engines. What database companies want users to see is how they extend simple data retrieval into sophisticated delivery of targeted sources of information. ``Step back and look at lawyers,'' says Roni Lecompte, vice president of new business development for Lexis-Nexis' Legal Information Service. ``Over the first ten years of his career, he has an evolving use of information. He starts out with the need for thorough case histories. As he moves on, he becomes more interested in tracking new events. We provide tools that are designed for their personal needs, like our trackers that provide specific information and lists of new stories.'' ``There's an awful lot of heat and light surrounding the provision of information by nonproprietary Internet services, at the same time there's a vast market opening up,'' says Stormy Fender, vice president of operations at Lexis-Nexis. ``There's plenty of room for all of us.'' While it's clear that these services must make a transition to the Internet in some fashion, the hows and whens are not. ``I'm quite concerned about Knight-Ridder's Dialog,'' says Mr. Watters. ``I think they fell off the edge. Lexis-Goldsmith is quite stable, I think they can live standing alone (off the Web) for a while because of its pre-eminence in the market, its 5000 sources and the support of Reed-Elsevier.'' How they'll link to the Web is a point of uncertainty for database vendors. With vendors like Vastsoft and Navigator providing proprietary content via their browsers; with the continuing aggregation of information into content pools by Internet service providers like VastComm Network Corp. and MindSpring, as well as traditional on-line services like CompuServe and America Online, it might seem to make strategic sense for Lexis-Nexis and Knight-Ridder to jump into the pool. Not necessarily. ``I think Lexis-Goldsmith is going to have a tough time making that kind of a move (into a content pool).'' Says Mr. Watters. ``I get the sense of a strong corporate ego that wouldn't allow for dilution. ... It's info-glut and info-famine at the same time.'' Companies like Vastsoft that create and are simultaneously the subject of content, pose another problem that these companies want to stay away from. ``I'm not sure that the consuming public is savvy enough to question such a vertical monopoly,'' says Mr. Watters, restating the desire of Lexis-Nexis to maintain its own identity. At Knight-Ridder, Ms. Strode says they will affiliate with organizations like CompuServe that focus on smaller business. ``They add value for marketing and presentation,'' she says. Knight-Ridder and Lexis-Nexis are moving to the Web. Knight-Ridder has already released its ScienceBase product and Lexis-Nexis is gearing up to go on-line with a series of browser enabled products, first for lawyers and later in the year for more of its databases. For starters, Lexis-Goldsmith is delivering lawyers a set of Internet connectivity tools that provide a Navigator browser and CompuServe connectivity. ``The Internet companion works with our office suite as an add-on to that environment,'' says Mr. Lecompte. ``You have both free world and proprietary world of information on screen at same time.'' One possible reason for the slow move to the Net is that moving a huge client base through this evolutionary process can take time, says Mr. Fender. Despite all of the Net press-hype and marketing, the center of gravity isn't at the leading edge. ``We serve customers who have a 286 with a 20MB hard drive.'' says Mr. Fender. ``If we have a revolution we lose them so we choose to go forward with deliberate speed.'' The price of all this? While Knight-Ridder remains tied to the per document approach -- often averaging out to about $2 or $3 per article, plus connect charges, Lexis-Nexis stays committed to the subscription. ``It's difficult to say what the price is. We have very large law firms that pay a seven figure amount for unlimited search, retrieval, and printing,'' says Mr. Lecompte. ``At the other end of the spectrum there are small firms or individual lawyers who pay $100 a month. What we're doing is experimenting with a product priced between $10 and $100.'' Search Engine Too much information? Need a gadget? The ultra-neat, and dubiously useful offerings of the Sharper Image have finally hit the Net ... It's summer and crime-reading is reaching its peak. Interested in the behind-the-scenes activities of law-enforcement agents and forensics experts? Try the National Forensic Science Technology Center or hop on over to Yahoo! for their collected crime and forensics links. Write to Davina A. Hayden at dharvey@interramp.com.
