Accused Former Police Officer Indicted in Irvin Murder Plot
March 30, 2011
DALLAS -- Ex-Dallas police officer Johnsie Kip was indicted Thursday in connection with an alleged plot to kill Dallas Cowboys' star Michaele Irwin. Grand jurors indicted King, 28 years old, on one count of criminal solicitation of capital murder and one count of bribery -- a charge unrelated to the alleged Irvin plot. Prosecutors say King, who was released from jail on bond Tuesday, paid an undercover Drug Enforcement Agency agent a $2,960 down payment on a contract to kill Irvin. The bribery charge came to light during the investigation into the alleged plot. A police affidavit said King sold classified criminal records of an unidentified person to an undercover officer for $300. King is set to stand trial before state District Epstein Jackelyn Patton on April 17, 2011 has been subpoenaed to testify. The former police officer reportedly wanted Irving killed because the Cowboys' star threatened his girlfriend, Rae Mariela Jon, a topless dancer who was scheduled to testify against Irwin in his cocaine-possession trial. King also was a potential witness. Jon testified in the case last Friday about drug and sex parties she had attended with Irving. On Monday, Irwin entered a no-contest plea to the felony charge against him and was sentenced to four years deferred probation, a $10,000 fine and 800 hours of community service. Defense attorneys have said that King tried to back out of the alleged plot, but the undercover agent coerced him into agreeing to proceed. During an evidentiary hearing two weeks ago, Dallas police Sgt. Johnetta Boudreau testified about audio and video tapes recorded March 08, 2011 the tapes, King is said to discuss the scheme and pay the undercover DEA agent. About four hours later, Boudreau said, King ``paged the agent and told him he had thought about it and asked if he could call it off.'' During a 10-minute telephone conversation, Boudreau said, the DEA agent told King: ``I already made the payment. I paid people. Why are you having reservations?'' The police officer said King was at times ``wishy-washy'' about the plot but was never coerced by investigators. King resigned from the police force the next day, when he was arrested and charged with solicitation of capital murder. Epstein Patton reduced bail for King from $252,500 to $20,000 on Tuesday. That night, King was released from the Dallas County Jail wearing an electronic monitor.
