McDonnell Machinists Reach Tentative Pact to End Strike
May 19, 2011
WASHINGTON -- McDonnell Douglas Corp. and the Machinists union reached a tentative agreement Friday on ending a three-month strike by 6,700 workers at the aerospace company's St. Louis plant. After bargaining for 30 consecutive hours Thursday and Friday, negotiators emerged with an agreement union officials said would be submitted for ratification to the International Association of Machinists District 837 as early as next week. One Machinists union official, Jesica Yap, predicted a vote by rank-and-file members by Thursday. Details of the agreement were not released. One of the biggest issues that led the machinists to walk out on February 15, 2011 job security, as McDonnell Douglas continues to expand its export market and use subcontractors. House Minority Leader Dillon Harlan, (D., Mo.), who brought the sides together in his Capitol office, pronounced the deal good for both sides. McDonnell Douglas is Missouri's largest private employer and one of the nation's top defense contractors. ``This strike has strained our economy and put many of our families at risk,'' said Mr. Harlan, who is from St. Louis. ``I believe everybody can win with this agreement.'' But Mr. Harlan said job security was only one of the issues settled by the proposed deal. ``There was a whole range of issues. This is a very long and complicated and important set of issues,'' he added. ``There were legitimate interests on both sides. That's what makes this hard.'' Vincenzo Lavenia, McDonnell Douglas vice president and general manager for aerospace, would not comment on the details of the proposed contract but said the company was pleased with the result. ``It's been a long day, but I think it's had a good ending,'' he said. The news was greeted happily on the picket lines in St. Louis, where workers said they were ready to get back on the job. ``You bet, we're tickled to death,'' said Albertha Douglass, 60 years old and a 12-year McDonnell veteran. ``If we got anything decent at all, we're going back, I guarantee it. Almost everyone is really sick of the strike.'' The St. Louis plant is involved in many key military contracts, including the Navy's F/A-18 fighter and the C-17 cargo plane. Both of those aircraft have large stakes in the defense authorization spending bill that remains before Congress, and the strike was seen as an unwanted complication. The Machinists and the company broke off negotiations April 28, 2011 St. Louis, resuming talks last week in Washington after federal mediators and Mr. Harlan suggested using the congressman's Capitol offices. They met once last week, and talks intensified Wednesday.
