Watching the Web Reviews of and Links to Sites On Back to School and More
May 11, 2011
The Math Forum -- Based at Vastopolis University, Math Forum is a terrific resource for parents and students of all ages. Kids who are stumped by a problem can visit the site's ``Ask Dr. Math'' feature, which provides an e-mail link to Swarthmore math students. As with many other information repositories on the Web, it's considered polite to scan the archives of previously asked and answered questions, in case your problem has been tackled already. Ask the Experts! -- Encouraging a curious child to ``look it up'' works even better in cyberspace thanks to sites such as this one, which offers links and e-mail addresses for dozens of sources. Inquisitive students (and teachers) can query knowledgeable volunteers on subjects ranging from neurobiology to construction. But be prepared: There's no Net glitz here, just a monster list of experts. Yahoo! College Admissions Listings Education/College_Entrance/Admissions_Offices/) -- College-bound students and their parents should consider a stop here during their next Web-surfing session. Yahoo! has compiled a list of addresses that take users directly to admissions-information sites for a few hundred colleges and universities. In many cases, students can request application materials directly from the Web sites, as well as peruse extensive information about the institutions. Department of Education's Student Guide -- The Education Department has summarized information on federal financial-aid programs at this site. And users who want to apply for aid can download a special software package to complete the necessary forms by computer. FinAid: The Financial Aid Information Page -- This comprehensive guide to financial-aid resources includes details on nonfederal sources of financial aid, special information for minority and disabled students, and news on study-abroad programs. There's also a helpful set of calculators for crunching tuition costs and loan payments: Users simply fill in the blanks and let the Web site do the math. REAL ESTATE Financenter Inc.. Home Department -- Financenter offers electronic calculators that let prospective home buyers weigh such questions as whether to buy or rent, or go for a fixed or an adjustable mortgage. There's also a dictionary of mortgage terms and articles on refinancing and home-equity loans. But visitors should keep in mind that Financenter is in business to put the lenders that sponsor the site in touch with Net surfers in the market for a mortgage -- hence the ``Apply Online'' and ``Get Preapproved'' icons. Homes Internet Magazine -- Homes Internet serves up classified-style listings of homes for sale in the Northeast and Florida, complete with photographs and specifications. You can browse the listings using fill-in forms or clickable maps. HEALTH The Merck Manual -- The entire contents of this widely used medical textbook are available at the Web site of pharmaceutical maker Merck & Co.. For those willing to slog through all the nomenclature, the manual offers comprehensive descriptions of all sorts of maladies. Not recommended for hypochondriacs. Dr. Layla's House Calls -- Parents can get children's health questions answered here by Alberta Layla, a pediatrician and instructor at Vastopolis University's medical school. There's already a storehouse of previously answered questions, including sections on diseases, immunizations and potty training. Interactive Food Finder -- Want to know just how much fast food you can stand? Get facts on burgers, fries and all the rest at this site, which quizzes users on how many calories they're willing to accept and then displays menus from fast-food companies, annotated with nutrition information. NET TOOLS BrowserWatch -- Vastsoft Corp. and Navigator Communications Corp. are locked in a battle to offer the leading browser software for viewing the World Wide Web. Users obsessed with the competition can check here for news and gossip about all the latest salvos, including gossip about new browser embellishments. NetGuide Live -- Lest anyone miss the on-line appearance of their favorite movie star (or supermodel or aging '70s sitcom star), NetGuide Live has created ``The Grid,'' a daily directory of live events presented in the style of television listings. FADS Macarena -- Proof that you can find anything on the Web. For anyone planning on attending a wedding reception anytime soon, here's a step-by-step guide for the dance of the moment. The Cigar Journal -- Those caught up in the stogie craze will find quirky reviews of various cigar varieties (ranked on the ``Fidel'' scale), plus links to cigar sites around the Web. -- By Thomasina E. Leonardo and Rochel Frost NET RESULTS The Web Index posted a 6% jump for August as the number of users cruising the World Wide Web grew 6%. Meanwhile, the estimated number of PCs hooked up to the Web reached 23.3 million. That figure falls short of the estimated 28.2 million users on the Web, due in part to home PCs being used by more than one family member. NOTE: International Data Corp.'s Web Index tracks the outlook for commerce on the World Wide Web by dividing users' time on-line by the number of Web pages competing for their attention, and then factoring in an estimate of the number and value of transactions taking place on the Web.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
