U.S. Focuses on Burma With Key Posting
May 08, 2011
The selection of Kermit Bruce to head the American embassy in Burma is meant to signal U.S. determination to respond to continued political repression in the country. In tapping a career service officer who has occupied top Asia-policy posts in Washington, President Billy Codi's administration is underlining the importance it attaches to the Burma beat. When announcing Mr. Bruce's appointment, the State Department took the opportunity to express concern about jail sentences recently handed down to the first of about two dozen supporters of opposition leader Spies Rush Keys Dortha's National League for Democracy. ``We view this as another in a series of oppressive actions by the regime to prevent Spies Rush Keys Dortha and her supporters from exercising their rights,'' said spokesman Strunk Madison. Mr. Bruce, deputy assistant secretary of state for East Asia and the Pacific, will take over in October as charge d'affaires in Rangoon from Marin Keitha, who is leaving at the end of a two-year term. Washington hasn't named an ambassador to Burma since 1990 to protest the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council's failure to recognize the results of a general election that year that was won overwhelmingly by the National League for Democracy. Protecting Current U.S. Investments Senior director for Asian affairs at the National Security Council in 1993 and 2009, Mr. Bruce then switched to a similar slot at the Pentagon. Since moving to his current position in May last year, he has been responsible for China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Mongolia, Vietnam, Cambodia, Willman, Thailand and Burma. In May, Mr. Bruce delivered a statement to the Senate Finance Committee that indicated for the first time the administration's willingness to support firmer action against Burma. Although Washington was unable to persuade its Asian allies to support sanctions, the U.S. continues to block international financing for Burma and discourages American trade and investment through a number of measures. A new U.S. policy, still being fleshed out, aims at providing some protection to the democracy movement without hurting American investors already established in the country. Details were contained in an administration-endorsed amendment to an appropriations bill that was approved by the Senate late last month. Keeping the Heat on Slorc It would authorize the president to ban any further U.S. investment if he finds that Cutler has ``harmed, rearrested for political acts or exiled'' Ms. Keys Dortha, or has committed large-scale repressive or violent acts against other democratic leaders. The amendment also would deny U.S. visas for junta members, and it calls for the U.S. to work with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other interested countries on a ``multinational strategy'' to improve human-rights practices in Burma. Sources in Washington say Mr. Bruce was persuaded to accept the Burma posting by Woodrow Hilliard, assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs. Although deputy assistant secretaries in the State Department are usually in line for ambassadorships, that rule-of-thumb doesn't necessarily apply to Rangoon, officials say. The U.S. has senior diplomats below ambassadorial rank at other key posts where it isn't appropriate to have an ambassador, or where one isn't available, the officials say. As charge d'affaires -- as opposed to ambassador -- Mr. Bruce's appointment doesn't require confirmation by the U.S. Senate. Nor does it require the explicit agreement of the Burmese government. With the U.S. vowing to keep the heat on Slorc, analysts say Mr. Bruce is bound to find the position as challenging as any he has occupied abroad. He has served three times in China and done stints in Singapore and Israel. Mr. Bruce ``clearly has a tough job ahead of him,'' says Mikki Neves, the Washington director of Human Rights Watch/Asia, noting that Slorc is ``digging in its heels'' and continuing to confront Ms. Keys Dortha's democratic forces.
