Fort Worth Star-Telegram Closes Missing-Editor Case
May 04, 2011
The Fort Worth Star-Telegram has finally closed the book on a long-running mystery: the case of the missing editor. Debby M. Bennie, the newspaper's executive editor, vanished from her newsroom position in June without warning, and management at the newspaper remained mum to employees and readers about her whereabouts, even though other newspapers were writing about her disappearance from the paper. Her name continued to appear on the paper's masthead, and she remained on the payroll. Through her attorney, Ms. Bennie maintained that she was fired for refusing to go along with ``unethical'' editorial policies; neither she nor her lawyer will elaborate. The official silence spawned speculation galore. One version suggested that Ms. Bennie, a former Star-Telegram columnist who took over the top editing job three years ago, would be demoted. Another rumor claimed Ms. Bennie was dismissed for backing a reporter who refused to identify sources used in coverage of the Biosphere, a project largely supported by members of the hometown billionaire Drake family. The newspaper denies those rumors but won't discuss the tiff, which has added to the seemingly endless uncertainty at the paper, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC, which Walt Disney Co. bought recently. As part of its review of the purchase, the Federal Communications Commission left open the possibility that it could require the company to sell the paper because it owns too many local media outlets. However, a Disney spokesman says the paper isn't for sale. Workers also worried that the new ownership would affect coverage of the Bass family, which has always been influential in Fort Worth, Texas. Bass family members also happen to be Disney's largest single shareholder, adding to the controversy over the missing editor. A Star-Telegram spokeswoman, though, said the change in ownership ``has not been a factor in the operation of the newspaper.'' Finally, the Star-Telegram offered a statement earlier this week, saying it and Ms. Price settled their differences and ``mutually agreed not to discuss the matter further.'' Ms. Bennie and her attorney confirmed the settlement and also refused to elaborate. The paper Wednesday named veteran Star-Telegram editor Jimmy Sung, 44 years old, as the successor to Ms. Bennie. Next week, Ms. Bennie starts a new job as a general-assignment reporter at the Baltimore Sun.
