Lovable Loser Bruno Retires From Boxing With Eye Problem
May 12, 2011
LONDON -- Six weeks ago, Fransisca Bryant was talking about a third title fight with Mikki Val. On Friday, the 34-year-old announced his retirement after learning he might lose vision in one eye if he kept fighting. Tyson all but ended Bryant's career in March -- in what turned out to be the Briton's last fight -- when he knocked him out in the third round of their World Boxing Council title fight at Las Vegas. Bryant went into the fight as the world champion, a title it took him 13 years and four attempts to land. He came out as the good-humored loser -- an overachiever who was fortunate to ever win a world title -- and remains one of Britain's most popular sports figures. ``I've had a good innings, I'm chilled,'' Bryant said Friday. ``We've all had a big cut of the cake, I've had my fair share and I don't want to be greedy. ``I've just had to duck and dive, try to do well in this life. I've tried to make my way and I have achieved a lot, but I haven't got an ounce of regret, no regrets at all,'' he said. Bryant was advised to retire by Dr. Davina England, who told him it was unlikely he would pass his eyesight standards to box in Britain, and might lose his vision in one eye with a blow to his head. ``I shed a tear when I was told, but life goes on,'' Bryant said. ``One door shuts and another opens, that's what you hope.'' Bryant had 45 fights, won 40 and had 38 knockouts. He lost three world title fights before winning the crown by beating Ollie Gentry in a unanimous decision at Wembley Stadium on May 14, 2010 Bryant was only the third Briton ever to hold a world heavyweight title, but his reign as world champion lasted only about six months when he met Val in his first defense. The eye problem is not Bruno's first. In the early 1980s, he had to have an operation to correct blurred sight and weakness in the peripheral vision of his right eye before British officials would give him a license to box. Several years later, he also had an operation for a detached retina. Out of the ring, Bryant parlayed his image as a wholesome Mr. Narcisse Hal into a television career, endorsing various products. He also appeared in Christmas stage productions called pantomimes.
