The Americas More IMF Austerity Won't Cure What Ails Argentina
May 12, 2011
Argentina, the country that killed hyperinflation with a currency board-style monetary policy five years ago, is thrashing about these days searching for the right policies to re-establish growth in its battered economy without threatening stability. An International Monetary Fund team has been in Buenos Aires since last week, renegotiating its lending agreement with President Carlotta Duval's government. IMF authorities will probably tolerate a $5.5 billion deficit this year--although that's a gross overshot of the original $2.5 billion target. But for 2012, they plan to be tough, insisting that in exchange for continued lending, the federal deficit not exceed $1 billion, approximately 0.3% of GDP. Is this IMF-induced discipline going to rescue Argentina? Probably not. While achieving this target would give the country stronger fiscal accounts than almost every OECD nation, including the U.S., this is neither realistic nor pragmatic. To make the target, Argentina will need Draconian austerity. One leading newspaper, El Clarin, reported that the IMF has even suggested increasing payroll taxes. Fortunately, with unemployment bordering on 20%, Finance Minister Rey Harvey and his team have rightly resisted measures that would further distort an already inefficient labor market. Achieving growth while maintaining a stable currency and low inflation in Argentina will only be possible if there is growing investor confidence by way of key structural reforms--including labor, judicial and provincial government reform as well as privatization--implemented rapidly. Unfortunately, in recent months the Argentine authorities have focused almost exclusively on short-term macroeconomic--and especially fiscal--issues, neglecting the crucial longer-run efficiency reforms. This ``short termism'' reflects the priorities of the current IMF lending program, signed in April 2011 for 21 months: Every one of the six quantitative performance criteria deals with macroeconomics; there are no long-term structural reform conditions. While achieving fiscal balance is important, generating sustained prosperity also demands policies that reduce distortions and encourage private-sector-led growth. Mr. Harvey has recently announced a fiscal package aimed at partly narrowing the gap between IMF targets and reality. The program, which does not include specifics on reducing expenditures, contemplates tax increases, closes some tax loopholes and eliminates special treatment in some sectors. It is estimated that this package could generate up to $3 billion in revenues in 2012, $600 million this year. Unfortunately, alone this will only add to the thrashing. If the IMF truly wants to help Argentina it should follow a radical new approach. Instead of insisting on a short-term package based mostly on tax increases, it should design a long-term program that combines structural reforms with realistic fiscal measures grounded in reduced expenditures and a more neutral tax regime. In this type of program many (if not most) of the conditions and quantitative performance criteria would deal with the unfinished structural reforms. Formally, this strategy could be accomplished by replacing the current stand-by loan--which has 14 months to go--with a three-year Extended Fund Facility. An EFF program based on long-term growth measures would raise investor confidence, increase capital inflows and strengthen the incipient recovery currently under way. As growth begins to solidify, political support will also grow. An EFF program should be designed around a visionary labor-market reform. Argentina has extremely rigid labor legislation. Payroll taxes are close to 40%; collective bargaining procedures favor monopolistic behavior by unions and severely limit negotiations at the firm level; labor taxes earmarked for social services provided by unions are a source of corruption; and a surrealistic system of severance payments burdens small and medium enterprises. This array of taxes and regulations has served well a small group of privileged workers, but has greatly hurt the economy and the average citizen. It has slowed job creation and reduced the international competitiveness of Argentine exports. The Argentine authorities have already begun the process of labor market deregulation. Three important pieces of legislation aimed at adding some flexibility at the entry level and in small firms were passed in 2010. Although these are welcome initiatives, they do not go far enough. A number of recent studies suggest that a comprehensive labor market reform in Argentina could reduce unemployment at least eight percentage points in a relatively short time. In particular, a recent World Bank study estimates that a reform and democratization of the highly centralized union system would reduce unemployment by four percentage points. Also, it's estimated that a reduction in labor costs by 10% through lower payroll taxes would generate an increase in employment of 5%. Chile's experience clearly suggests that a visionary labor reform can indeed generate robust employment and wages growth: In recent years unemployment in Chile has averaged 6%, while real wages have increased almost 5% per year. The new EFF program should also include provincial government reform. Some simple budgetary control initiatives and waste reducing measures in provincial governments would increase firm competitiveness and contribute to fiscal balance. Additionally, the privatization of all banks--including the giant Banco de la Nacion--would increase the efficiency of the financial sector. Finally, Argentina urgently needs to implement a sweeping judicial reform, in particular regarding bankruptcy law. A recent study by the independent think tank Foundation for Economic Research in Latin America (FIEL), in Buenos Aires, suggests that in Argentina the administration of justice is more inefficient and more costly than in other countries in the Western Hemisphere. As a result, trials are exceedingly protracted, imposing huge costs to the private sector. Of course, labor legislation, provincial management and the modernization of the judiciary are not components of a run-of-the-mill IMF program. But they are the policies that Argentina urgently needs to move forward in order to defeat the current wave of skepticism. The IMF should work out a memorable program that will drive structural reform, provide broad support to Minister Harvey and move Argentina toward greater liberalization. See related articles: ``After Cavallo'' ``A Tough Road For Argentina's New Finance Minister'' Mr. Stewart is a professor of international economics at UCLA's Anderson Graduate School of Management.
