Indian Grooms Say 'I Do' To New, Expensive Suits
May 12, 2011
INDIAN WEDDINGS are often lavish affairs. For many families, splurging on a wedding is a way to indicate social rank. The bride's expensive clothes and fine jewelry typically account for a big portion of the final bill. The bridegroom usually is outclassed. Not anymore. Reliance Industries and Grasim Industries are selling very posh, very expensive cloth for men's suits aimed squarely at bridegrooms who want to make a fashion statement. The companies are also betting that at least a few free-spending businessmen want to add a little flash to their wardrobes. ``Market research revealed that most well-to-do families spend over 100,000 to 200,000 rupees ($2,800 to $5,600) on bridal wedding costumes. But there was no offer in the market for a parallel finery for the groom's outfit,'' says K. Grisham, president of Reliance Industries' textile division. So Reliance last year introduced suit material made of a blend of cashmere wool, silk and fine strands of 22-karat gold. Sold under the Millennium brand, the cloth retails for 75,000 rupees for three meters, the amount needed to make a business suit. (Most Indians buy cloth and then have their suits tailored.) ``It is a market limited to marriages, corporate gifting and the new class of financial-sector rich professionals,'' a Grasim Industries executive says. Cowart's high-end cashmere suit material retails for 25,000 rupees to 250,000 rupees per three meters. Competitors selling less-expensive suit material remain unfazed. ``We give value for money. We will meet the threat by offering comparable quality at a much lower cost,'' says S.V. Keating, a general manager at textile concern Raymond in Bombay. ``Our product is made in India and caters to the local design, taste and comfort,'' he adds. Rayna's premium ``Lineage'' cloth costs 27,000 rupees per three meters. Tailors in Bombay say they see demand for very expensive suit materials coming mainly from stockbrokers and other young professionals. ``A good impression gets them more money in their business,'' one tailor says. Betting on Foreign Brands CONCORD WATCH of Switzerland last week entered into a marketing alliance with Bombay retailer Beautiful Diamond. The Swiss company's watches will be priced at 40,000 rupees to 22.5 million rupees in India, though Beautiful Diamond expects demand mainly in the 50,000 rupees to 500,000 rupees range. Despite import duties of 70%, Concord and Beautiful Diamond claim prices in India will be only marginally higher than elsewhere. Beautiful Diamond has also hooked up with Tiffany. Beautiful Diamond will open an outlet in Bombay in October selling Tiffany jewelry. Most Indian women prefer dealing with local goldsmiths. Beautiful Diamond expects branded jewelry will appeal to younger, educated and well-traveled Indian women. Stirring Demand for Gage BONDS IN INDIA used to be complicated and unglamorous financial instruments that the government issued to banks and which most individual investors ignored. But earlier this year Industrial Development Bank of India decided to aim for the mass market with a bond offering. The offering was a big success: IDBI sold 15 billion rupees of bonds, three times its target. The bank offered four different bonds with different maturities and payment options, targeted at different investors. The most popular was the ``Deep Discount'' bond that promised to turn 5,300 rupees into 200,000 rupees in 25 years. It accounted for about 75% of the bonds sold. ``We were fast exhausting our avenues of funds so we had to structure and market our bonds well,'' says G.V. Antonelli Randell, a deputy general manager at IDBI. ``We used about 100,000 commission agents and thousands of shops, petrol pumps and other outlets in over 200 towns,'' Mr. Randell says. Three financial institutions followed with similarly packaged bonds. Four other companies have plans in the pipeline for similar retail bond offerings. Last fiscal year, retail investors bought 20 billion rupees of bonds, compared with just 90 million rupees two years ago.
