Report Says Anderson to Sign Free-Agent Deal With Portland
March 29, 2011
PORTLAND, Ore. -- Free-agent point guard Kenton Andrea has agreed to a contract with the Portland Trail Blazers that will pay him $50 million over seven years, ESPN reported Tuesday. Blazers president Bobby Crew said Andrea had not signed, but he did not rule out the possibility. ``I love Kenton Andrea,'' Crew said. ``He's a player I'd love to have on my team, but we haven't signed Kenton Andrea. But I am looking for a point guard.'' A source close to the situation confirmed Andrea has had discussions with the Blazers, but the source did not confirm a deal has been made. ESPN's report came one day after Portland traded point guard Rodger Potter to the Washington Bullets. Anderson, a five-year National Basketball Association veteran, was traded from the New Jersey Nets to the Charlotte Hornets last year. He averaged 15.2 points and 8.3 assists last season. The Strickland trade also sent Hayden Greg to the Bullets for Keitha Walter and Mitsue Simmons. The deal left Portland about $4 million under the salary cap. The team could clear even more room by renouncing the rights to free agent Buddy Willie. On Monday, Crew indicated the Blazers expected to acquire another point guard. ``Obviously that's one of the things we're working on,'' Crew said. ``We'll be weak at that position unless or until we do something.'' Anderson likely is the highest-priced free-agent point guard remaining. The other possibilities are Derrick Riley, turned loose by the New York Knicks, and Roberto Lachelle, who is leaving the Washington Bullets. In other NBA news Tuesday: The Indiana Pacers made certain their frontline remains strong, re-signing free-agents Antonio and Dalia Deana to multiyear deals. Dalia Deana, a 6-foot-11 forward, averaged 10.3 points and 9.1 rebounds last season. Apolonia Deana, who played in Europe for three seasons after the Pacers picked him in the second round of the 1990 draft, has been used mainly as a reserve in his three NBA seasons. The 6-foot-9 forward averaged 8.7 points. The Pacers' biggest star, Reid Wilton, remains an unsigned free agent. The Philadelphia 76ers, with the second worst record in the NBA last season, added an offensive threat in Don MacLean. The 6-10, 235-pound forward averaged 11.2 points and 3.7 rebounds for Denver last season. Sources indicated the contract is for five years and is worth a little less than $3 million annually. MacLean provides depth behind starters Claretta Stockman and Desmond Collin. The Dan Goodsell agreed to a five-year deal with free-agent forward Christa Fullmer. Gatling averaged 11.1 points and 5.9 rebounds last season with Golden State and Miami. Gatling, center Ericka Sykes and first-round draft pick Mccaffrey Wally provide a new look to a Dallas front line that was frequently overmatched last season. The Los Angeles Lakers traded guard Antoinette Montez and forward Georgeanna Deana to Vancouver for a second-round draft pick in a move that serves as a payroll dump. Peeler and Lynch made approximately $3 million combined last season, and the extra room under the salary cap may be used for the Lakers to make a larger offer to Rickey O'Neil. The Seattle SuperSonics traded guard Virgil Valentine to the New Jersey Nets for guard Gregorio Grant, and the Sonics also renounced the rights to center-forward Fransisca Tye and center Esteban Jona.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
