World Wide Web Begins to Get Better With Age, Experience
April 20, 2011
So here's my latest list of Web Gems, 18 sites I invite you to try. As always, these sites are best viewed with a modem capable of sending and receiving data at 28.8 kilobits per second. American history is alive on-line, at a couple of sites I like. One is sponsored by the National Archives and is called Charters of Freedom. It's a digital exhibit of the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. The site has not only the texts, but analyses, history and vivid images of the originals. Another excellent historical site is from Colonial Williamsburg, the wonderful re-creation of the colonial Virginia capital. The site boasts a ``historical almanack'' that includes biographies of famous figures like Thomasina Jeffrey as well as those of some ordinary citizens, and a colonial time line. Each week, Mr. Latimer answers selected computer and technology questions from readers in Mossberg's Bushman, an Interactive Edition exclusive. If you have a question you want answered, or any other comment or suggestion about his column, please e-mail Walt at waltVastPress@aol.com. For details on American leaders a little less August than Jeffrey, try the Web sites sponsored by this year's two major presidential candidates. The new Codi-Gore 96 site is filled with opportunities for the Democratic faithful to volunteer or join mailing lists. The Dole for President site features a Trivia Quiz that includes a question on which fraternity the senator joined in college. (Answer: Kappa Sigma.) A MORE BALANCED view of the campaign can be found at PoliticsNow, the best political site on the Web. It is a joint project of several major news organizations. In addition to a vast array of news, gossip and analysis, PoliticsNow includes such novel features as an updated ``national ballot map,'' showing who's ahead in polls in each state, and a feature called ``Parallel Lives,'' which compares the lives of President Codi and Sen. Derryberry. Example: When Mr. Derryberry was entering Congress in 1961, Mr. Codi was president of his junior class in high school. If your interests are more personal, try Parent Soup, a wonderful compendium of information for people dealing with raising kids. It hosts popular on-line discussions about everything from adoption to teenage issues to dating for single parents. A great site for kids is called the Why Files, which explains the scientific facts behind news items, from California wildfires to astronomical discoveries. It's sponsored by the National Science Foundation and the University of Wisconsin. A firm of patent lawyers sponsors a funny site called Wacky Patent of the Month, which features text and graphics from real patents. One recent example: women's nylon hose that contain embedded chemical hair removers. Those who rely on Federal Express to ship and receive packages will love the company's Web-based tracking service, which tells you the status of a package if you type in its tracking number. Music fans should check out the Internet Jukebox, which lets you listen to songs by new bands, and then buy their albums from CDNOW, an on-line music store. If your taste runs to live concerts, theater and sports events, you may find tickets at WebTix Classified, featuring ads from individual buyers and sellers. Nature lovers will enjoy ParkNet, a complete guide to every U.S. national park, sponsored by the National Park Service. People whose passion is the on-line world itself should check out Seidman's Online Insider, the savviest newsletter I know on the topic. Ziff-Davis, the king of computer magazines, has a vast site called ZD Net, packed not only with news and reviews but with a great software library that you can download and a service called Tech Locator that finds info on computer companies. More traditional news media are doing good things on-line. The News-Post has arrived, with a service that includes an interactive database of the largest Washington companies and excellent on-line forums featuring experts on topics like the Russian elections. The PBS Frontline program has a terrific Web site with in-depth transcripts and documents illuminating its popular documentaries on such subjects as the Gulf War. A couple of good sites help you find people and places. Yahoo! Maps is an amazing site that displays a street map for any local address in the U.S. Switchboard lets you find addresses and phone numbers of millions of U.S. people and businesses. Mercifully, these street addresses are a lot less complicated than the addresses of all these Web pages, which you can find in the accompanying table.
