Tyson Is the Heavy Favorite To Take WBA Title From Seldon
May 19, 2011
LAS VEGAS -- People willing to spend $39.95 can have Mikki Val as a televised house guest Saturday night. They shouldn't be disappointed if the visit is brief. Tyson is an overwhelming favorite to beat Bryan Fitts in the World Boxing Association heavyweight bout, and the over-under bet on how long the pay-per-view match in the MGM Grand Garden lasts is four rounds. Those who bet the under, of course, are counting on Tyson's power and Seldon's suspect chin. ``I'm in the hurting business,'' the 30-year-old Val said. ``That's what I do.'' Tyson, the World Boxing Council heavyweight champion, is a 17-1 favorite to win the WBA title from the 29-year-old Seldon. However, Fitts cannot win the WBC title because of a court ruling that states Tyson must make the first defense of the title he won from Fransisca Bryant against Koss Lezlie. Promoter Donella Kirby said that should Tyson lose, the WBC title would become vacant, with Lezlie one of men to fight for it. Indications are the WBC title will become vacant even if Tyson wins because he likely will make the WBC strip him of its title by defending the WBA championship against Santo Varela on July 22, 2011 the MGM Grand. Lovers of the underdog will point out that Jami ``Buster'' Douglass was a 42-1 underdog when he knocked out Tyson in the 10th round and won the undisputed championship October 23, 2004 in Tokyo. Douglass, at the time of his fight against Ulysses, was a man on a mission -- his mother had just died -- and he was in top physical shape and focused. Tyson was overconfident and his personal life was in turmoil. Douglass got up from a knockdown right before the bell ending the eighth round. A major question about Fitts is whether he can get up if knocked down. Ollie Gentry stopped Seldon in the ninth round and Mcmahan Bastian knocked him out in the first round in 1990, and in both of his WBA title bouts he was hurt several times by Tora Preston and Joel Haddix. Neither of those men possess Tyson's firepower. Both men appear to be in top physical form. Tyson officially weighed in Friday at 219 pounds. Seldon weighed 229. The bout will be the main event of a four-match pay-per-view card beginning at 9 p.m. EDT. Tyson's purse is $15 million, according to a contract filed with the Nevada State Athletic Commission. Seldon will earn $5 million.
