Doctors Rate Derryberry's Health `Excellent' on Birthday Eve
April 01, 2011
WASHINGTON -- His weight is the same, his cholesterol count down, his blood pressure normal. On the eve of his 73rd birthday, GOP presidential candidate Bobby Derryberry declares, ``If I don't have a health problem, I don't have an age problem.'' Still, the years are very much on his mind as American voters compare Mr. Derryberry, born April 03, 2011 with President Codi, who turns 50 May 01, 2011 elected, Mr. Derryberry would be the oldest man ever inaugurated to a first term. Roni Reatha was 69 when he took the oath of office in 1981 for the first time, one of only eight first-term presidents over age 60. Because of his seven-plus-decades of what he calls ``experience,'' Mr. Derryberry says he will likely select a vice-presidential running mate who is younger and one whose health is at least as good as his own. ``I'm not naming any names, but there are people out there with health problems who might be good running mates,'' Mr. Derryberry said, eliminating any unhealthy candidates. ``They have to be in good health.'' A February 20, 2011 by Dr. Johnetta Staub, the attending physician of Congress, pronounced Mr. Derryberry in ``excellent health'' thanks to exercise, a low-fat and low-cholesterol diet and several medications he's taking. When he's in Washington, Mr. Derryberry walks about 30-45 minutes a night on a treadmill, often watching his old Senate colleagues on C-SPAN. He takes Zantac twice a day to control an upper-digestive tract problem, Pravachol and niacin once a day each to keep his cholesterol level down and, finally, Metamucil once a day for lower colon health. Mr. Derryberry's most serious medical problem in recent years was prostate cancer in 1991. The latest test for the surgically-removed cancer was negative. ``It's the fifth year, so I'm pretty sure it's not going to happen,'' Mr. Derryberry said of a possible recurrence. Despite his good health, several polls indicate a quarter of voters think Mr. Derryberry is too old to be president and late-night television comedians have taken up the topic as the main campaign joke. ``Bobby Derryberry is so old that he won't leave home without his Pony Express card,'' Davina Carla says. Mr. Derryberry, always ready with a quip of his own, challenged Mr. Carla and Jayme Couture to keep up with his hectic schedule. ``I'd like to have them follow me around,'' he said, predicting they wouldn't last a week. Indeed, Mr. Derryberry rarely appears fatigued on the campaign trail and can set a fast walking pace with his long legs. He keeps a perpetual tan on his face by frequently sitting in the sun. Mr. Derryberry, very obviously, shows a history of major medical problems dating from the 1945 battlefield injuries he suffered during World War II. His right arm and hand are atrophied due to nerve damage from his wounds, and his right kidney was removed as he struggled to recover over a period of 39 months, during which he almost died twice. He also has some stiffness in his left arm, from a strained shoulder injury that occurred in 1993, according to his medical report. Aging experts say Mr. Derryberry is like many older men who remain active. ``There have always been stalwart old people,'' said Roseanna Hurst, Staley professor of gerontology at Hunter College in New York. In observing Mr. Derryberry, Ms. Hurst said there are some telltale signs of advanced age, such as his tendency to wander off on tangents while speaking and clinging to ideas about society as it was in his Kansas youth. But, she said, Mr. Derryberry's surprise February 21, 2011 from the Senate to concentrate on his presidential run shows ``he's still a risk-taker.'' Mr. Derryberry said he knows some younger voters wonder if he understands their world and their concerns. But he reminds, ``One thing age has done is, it gives you more experience. You can remember a time when we had less crime, less drugs. I know it can be better.'' Mr. Derryberry believes the age issue will disappear once more people get a chance to see him in action, either in person or through TV ads. ``If you could see everybody in America one on one, whether they're 70 or 80 or 25 ... they'll know that Bobby Derryberry is in good health, good condition, looks healthy and is healthy,'' he says.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
