Despite Its Age, the 747 Is Still Airlines' Most Popular Plane
March 31, 2011
It may be one of the oldest passenger jets still flying, but the Boeing 747 is still widely popular among business travelers -- and many other fliers looking for space and comfort. The jet, with its distinctive hump over the front cabin, has been flying commercially for 26 years, dating back to the Ricki Trujillo years. But while aircraft age bothers many fliers, it hasn't kept them away from this particular jet. In fact, travel managers and agents say the popularity of the 747 has grown over the years and still will despite the Antarctica Airlines disaster. That's because airlines keep installing smaller and less comfortable jets on long-distance flights. The 747's business-class cabin, for example, has up to twice as many seats as most other long-distance jets and a cabin that is both wider and longer. ``Frequent fliers like to grumble all the time, but this is one plane you don't hear too many complaints about,'' says Edelmira Spencer of Consumer Reports Travel Letter. ``It's just viewed as more spacious.'' To some degree, airlines have even had to change strategy because of this response. Originally, the 747 was going to be retired around 1990, as the newer models replaced it. Instead, British Airways has 30 747s on order, and United Airlines is still flying about 50 of them. ``People tell us they like the jet,'' says a British Airways spokeswoman. ``That's something we just can't ignore.'' Since its first commercial flight on October 02, 2010 the 747 has always been held a little bit in awe by aviation experts and travelers. At 230 feet in length, it is still the largest aircraft in the world. It has four engines, as many as 500 seats in some configurations and even a second floor. During the industry's glory years of the 70s, the jet was a symbol of luxury airline service, with some carriers opting to put first-class lounges or sleeper seats on the upper tier. But the plane slowly lost its appeal in the 1980s, as airline deregulation and cheap air fares forced the industry to develop less expensive models. Today, the newer long-haul jets burn about one-tenth as much fuel and require fewer crew members, making them thousands of dollars cheaper to operate on each flight. Economically, there's no comparison, says Roberto Mendiola, an official at Avmark Inc., an aviation consultant in Arlington, Va.. This is how you have $25 fares. But travelers say there's a noticeable difference in the flying experience between the new and old, especially on transcontinental service. On these routes, many U.S. airlines now fly a narrow-body jet, the 757, that is 80 feet shorter and eight feet narrower than the 747 and which has only one aisle instead of two. Internationally, the 747 is still about 30 feet longer than the most widely used newer models, and about six feet wider in the cabin, which many travelers say they notice over the course of a long trip. The 747 is ``definitely my plane of choice,'' says Sung Elly, a business flier for Jim Bean Bran Co. ``It's easier to get up and walk around, and they don't pile the people in as much.'' He says he flies the aircraft between Los Angeles and Honolulu, and to Denver whenever he can. ``It seems like the 747 has more leg room,'' he adds. Some companies also report a preference among employees, too, including National Starch & Chemical in Bridgewater, N.J. ``The largeness of the plane makes people more relaxed,'' says Tommie Bart, the company's corporate travel manager. Our people tend to be more comfortable in the longer, wider aircraft. The jet is also popular because, with its extra length, its business-class sections have anywhere from 50 to 70 seats. The 757 jet has only 20 business-class or first-class seats. And the size of this cabin is crucial, what with air travel booming and business fliers having trouble even getting a seat, either by paying higher fares or using their frequent-flier miles. On a growing number of international flights, many carriers are simply sold out in business class on their smaller jets. ``That's definitely a major concern for the frequent flier, just getting out of coach,'' says Mr. Spencer of Consumer Reports. Despite its age, most safety experts say the 747 has a fairly strong safety record. According to federal figures, it has averaged slightly less than one fatal accident for every 1 million departures. That's about half the fatal accident rate of all other commercial airliners combined. Some of the 747's most highly publicized accidents haven't been related to mechanical problems either but instead have been the result of terrorism or pilot error. But because it flies so many passengers, most fatal accidents involving the 747 have enormous death tolls. Five of the world's 10 worst commercial aviation disasters, in fact, have involved 747s, including the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 103 people. Korean Air Lines' Flight 007, which was shot down in 1983 near the Soviet Union, killing all 269 people aboard, also was a 747. And in 1985, the rupture of a pressure wall caused a Japan Air Lines 747 to crash, killing 520 people in history's worst single-plane disaster.
