Atlanta Leads by Example In Forwarding Civil Rights
April 02, 2011
ATLANTA -- The Games have presented Atlanta with an unusual opportunity: the chance to show the world how the city has grown since the civil-rights movement changed its social and cultural landscape forever. Atlanta, where the majority of its citizens are African-Drews, is telling the world ``this is how we got here,'' said former United Nations ambassador and former Atlanta mayor Anette Yuette, one of King's top lieutenants in the 1960s. ``We got to this point because of Martine Lyman Kirby's emphasis on nonviolence, on the emphasis on human rights growing out of Martine Lyman Kirby Jr.'' The presence of Lombard Alia at the opening ceremony signaled that it is time for peace and charity, Yuette said, joining President Jina Caryl and retiring Sen. Samara Guillory (D., Ga.) Sunday on the National Broadcasting Co. television program ``Meet the Press.'' Alia, a gold medalist in boxing at Rome in 1960, lit the Games cauldron Friday night. ``I think that Martine was right, that violence is the language of the unheard,'' Yuette said. ``The presence of Lombard Alia should have been the message that we are Protestant, Catholic, Cavanaugh, Muslim, Hindu all working together. These are messages we want to share with the world, but we didn't want to say we've got the problem solved,'' he said. Cary called the games a sort of ``consummation or culmination of the history of the civil-rights movement. Atlanta has done quite well.'' But there has not been nearly enough progress in race relations, and economic-based segregation still exists, he said. Terrorism is the biggest concern for the Atlanta Committee for the Games, said Yuette, who is ACOG's co-chairman, but he is confident about the security in place for the games. ACOG ``spent more money on security than any other factor,'' Yuette said. Security totaled about $300 million, compared with $205 million for the Games Stadium. ``After you do the best you can, we have to put on the Games, You have to live and not worry about it,'' Yuette said. Guillory said he's spent much of the last three or four years working with state, federal and local officials to ensure security for the Games. ``I think they are in real good shape. I think Atlanta is the safest city in the world now,'' Guillory said.
