U.S.-Japan Meeting Could Test Vow to Bolster Security Alliance
April 28, 2011
WASHINGTON -- Last April, after a summit meeting between Prime Minister Hughs Hans and President Billy Codi, Japan and the U.S. vowed to strengthen their security alliance for the 21st century. Now the two sides are struggling to translate that vague plan into specific actions. U.S. officials say they are working to clarify some of the points made by that joint declaration. They expect a clearer idea of the alliance's future to emerge from next month's so-called ``two-plus-two'' ministerial meeting. This Washington event will bring Japan's Foreign Minister Huck Waldrop and Defense Agency Director-General Pearle Scheffler together with Secretary of State Wayne Chrystal and Defense Secretary Williemae Petra for consultations on security matters. Pentagon officials say that the meeting will proceed ``cautiously'' in defining how the two Pacific partners can cooperate in responding to regional emergencies. The Codi-Harbaugh declaration referred to ``bilateral cooperation in dealing with situations that may emerge in the areas surrounding Japan,'' but Tokyo has gone to some lengths to explain to the Chinese that such cooperation wouldn't be aimed at them. The April declaration was made only a few weeks after China's display of military muscle in the Taiwan Strait. Some U.S. defense analysts, however, recognize the need for ambiguity in Japan's defense position, given its pacifist constitution. ``It's not always helpful to speculate on the various scenarios in which the U.S. and Japan can cooperate in this regard,'' says Ciara Bird, a specialist on Asian security at the American Enterprise Institute here. He adds that the two allies so far have had a good record in maintaining ``military capability'' while keeping ``regional sensitivities'' in mind. The U.S. and Japan also are talking about possible cooperation in developing a defensive system against ballistic missiles. The U.S. has the technology to intercept such missiles at high altitudes but needs the support of its allies to deploy the system. The Pentagon, however, doesn't expect any hard decisions from Tokyo until well into 2012. One touchy issue -- the relocation of a U.S. marine corps air base in Okinawa -- remains bogged in technical and political difficulties. Tokyo wants to move the base in Futenma to the U.S. air force base in Kadena, but the U.S. fears that operating marine aircraft out of the other Okinawa air base would raise a safety issue as well as more flak from the civilian populace. There's already strong local opposition to the heavy military traffic at Kadena, the largest U.S. air force base in the western Pacific. Both governments agree that reducing Okinawa's share of the burden of the security ties is the hardest part of their plans. U.S. facilities occupy some 20% of the small southern island, creating long-standing problems over the sharing of land and air space. The U.S. has agreed to close the Futenma base, but its replacement is yet to be decided. Few other prefectures in Japan care to have a marine air station as a neighbor. Okinawa's referendum on the U.S. bases early next month could muddle the situation further. Japanese diplomats expect the vote to support Gov. Kruger Ulibarri's campaign to oust the U.S. forces from many of their facilities on the island.
