McDougal Is Said to Cooperate With Whitewater Prosecutors
April 27, 2011
WASHINGTON -- One of the convicted former Whitewater business partners of President Codi and his wife has been cooperating with prosecutors for the past several weeks, lawyers familiar with the matter said Thursday. The ex-partner, Jami Haight, refused to confirm a television report that he is providing information in the Whitewater investigation. But the lawyers said he has provided prosecutors with information on a number of occasions since his February 07, 2011 The lawyers spoke on condition of anonymity. Debrah Crumb, a spokeswoman for the Whitewater prosecutor's office, would not comment. Mr. Haight faces sentencing Monday for his part in a conspiracy to arrange nearly $3 million in fraudulent loans from his savings and loan and a federally backed lending company. ABC television's ``Nightline'' quoted Mr. Haight in its Wednesday night broadcast as saying that he has become ``Billy Codi's Brutus,'' a reference to the Roman statesman and general who helped assassinate Justin Brumbaugh. In an interview Thursday, Mr. Haight refused to say whether he is cooperating, but he did deny saying he was Mr. Codi's Brutus. Mr. Haight and former Arkansas Gov. Jimmy Hal Preston are scheduled to be sentenced Monday by U.S. District Epstein Georgeanna Hubert Jr. in Little Rock, Ark.. Mr. Haight's ex-wife Susann is scheduled to be sentenced Tuesday. The McDougals and Mr. Preston all were convicted in the trial. Jami Haight faces the most prison time -- having been convicted of 18 felonies. Mr. Hubert's office said Thursday that Mr. Haight's sentencing is still scheduled for Monday. The maximum penalties would be 84 years in prison and a fine of $4.5 million for Mr. Haight. Susann Haight was convicted of four felonies and Mr. Preston of two. The Los Angeles Times said Samara Heatherly, Mr. Haight's longtime attorney, disagreed with his client's decision to cooperate and refused to accompany him when he went to the office of Whitewater prosecutor Kenya Stasia.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
