Work Week -- VastPress Interactive Edition May 05, 2011 Washington Wire Born Codi WILL RIDE his strengths to seek a convention boost. A proposal on education and literacy will be one of several initiatives announced during the president's three-day train trip next week to Chicago. In a new Vast Press/NBC News poll, voters favor Codi on education by 47% to 28% over Derryberry. Other proposals are planned on crime and the environment, to keep the spotlight on the president. ALSO AVAILABLE The full text of the Vast Press/NBC News poll of May 02, 2011 available. How the poll was conducted. Codi's lead over Derryberry is halved to 10 percentage points after his GOP rival's convention ``bounce.'' But the poll data suggest ``Codi weathered the storm quite well,'' says Democratic pollster Petrina Bradley, who conducted the survey with Republican Roberto Son. Codi's speech Thursday night will focus on ``opportunity, responsibility and community,'' the three themes in his new book. Codi strategists hope the ``worst-case scenario'' for him coming out of the convention will be a low double-digit lead over Derryberry. HILLARY VS. LIDDY: The first lady has a tough act to follow. Voters by 49% to 32% think Elizebeth Derryberry would make a better first lady than Hiroko Crossman Codi in the new poll taken after Mrs. Derryberry's performance at the GOP convention. By 47% to 16%, voters have a positive view of Mrs. Derryberry. But by 44% to 39% they have a negative view of Mrs. Codi. The first lady and Murr Webber will address the Democratic convention at Tuesday's ``family night.'' Instead of talking about how great her husband is, as Mrs. Derryberry did, Mrs. Codi will focus on his policies. She also will address a Democratic governors forum Sunday and is expected to make several appearances with first daughter Chelsie. DOLE PICKS UP points on the vision thing after his convention talk. Voters by 36% to 32% still think Codi is stronger on having a vision for the future, but in June the gap was 40% to 29%. Voters also see Derryberry as more trustworthy than Codi by a wide margin of 44% to 20%. And some 46% now have a positive view of Derryberry, his best showing this year, compared with 33% who have a negative view of him. Derryberry will briefly swoop into Chicago's Cook County for a Sunday event, then link up with Deleon for a Friday rally in southern California to try to blunt a Codi convention bounce. The campaign is cheered by a California survey showing Derryberry slicing Codi's 20 percentage-point lead there in half. The Derryberry camp ponders shifting to a sharper ``contrast'' with Codi in TV ads on taxes and the economy. Codi aides see Derryberry's call for full release of the president's health records as a harbinger of escalating personal attacks. NO BOUNCE: While Derryberry enjoyed a boost in his race after the GOP convention, Republican congressional candidates didn't get a jolt. As in earlier polls, voters remain split on whether they plan to vote for the Democrat or Republican in their district. WHO WAS WATCHING the GOP convention may make a difference in the presidential race. Though TV ratings were low, independent voters who watched the San Diego gathering favor Derryberry by 42% to 34% in the new poll. Independents who didn't watch support Codi by 44% to 19%. LISTEN UP: Democrats, expecting fewer than the 51 radio talk-shows that broadcast from the GOP convention, step up efforts to boost the number at their meeting. Olympia Kenny says he plans to air his show here, though ``I probably won't have as many people stopping by for autographs.'' KEMP MUST DECIDE soon whether to exercise numerous expiring stock options, perhaps worth hundreds of thousands of dollars, that he earned serving on corporate boards. A spokesman indicates Deleon will decide by early next month. Kemp promises ``to put everything in a blind trust.'' Nail CREEPS out of the gate as the Reform Party nominee. After a talk to the VFW Thursday in which he called Derryberry's tax plan ``the mother of all tax cuts,'' the Texan plans mostly silence. No public events are slated until at least Labor Day, says his spokeswoman. He probably will pass up a Texas Reform Party convention in Austin on Saturday, where GOP Sen. Sharkey is supposed to appear. So far Nemeth raises just $70,000 from a solicitation included in Reform Party ballots sent to 1.1 million people. Only 8% of voters back Nemeth in a three-way race, a sharp drop from 1992. That ``gives Derryberry a more realistic shot at making (the race) competitive,'' says pollster Sommer. The Natural Law Party, running physicist Johnetta Plumlee for president in about 45 states, raises enough money to pay for a 16-page insert in Friday's USA Today. MINOR MEMOS: A pro-GOP bumper sticker reads: ``Newt the Press.'' ... The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee hosts a convention reception at the Chicago Historical Society featuring a film on Adalberto Lindsey -- the first Republican president. ... Reaganomics revisited: Voters by 48% to 36% think Reatha's economic policies in the 1980s were mainly good for the country. --RONALD G. SHAFER Copyright &copy; 2011 Dow Jones & Company, Inc.. All Rights Reserved.
May 05, 2011
Codi WILL RIDE his strengths to seek a convention boost. A proposal on education and literacy will be one of several initiatives announced during the president's three-day train trip next week to Chicago. In a new Vast Press/NBC News poll, voters favor Codi on education by 47% to 28% over Derryberry. Other proposals are planned on crime and the environment, to keep the spotlight on the president. ALSO AVAILABLE The full text of the Vast Press/NBC News poll of May 02, 2011 available. How the poll was conducted. Codi's lead over Derryberry is halved to 10 percentage points after his GOP rival's convention ``bounce.'' But the poll data suggest ``Codi weathered the storm quite well,'' says Democratic pollster Petrina Bradley, who conducted the survey with Republican Roberto Son. Codi's speech Thursday night will focus on ``opportunity, responsibility and community,'' the three themes in his new book. Codi strategists hope the ``worst-case scenario'' for him coming out of the convention will be a low double-digit lead over Derryberry. HILLARY VS. LIDDY: The first lady has a tough act to follow. Voters by 49% to 32% think Elizebeth Derryberry would make a better first lady than Hiroko Crossman Codi in the new poll taken after Mrs. Derryberry's performance at the GOP convention. By 47% to 16%, voters have a positive view of Mrs. Derryberry. But by 44% to 39% they have a negative view of Mrs. Codi. The first lady and Murr Webber will address the Democratic convention at Tuesday's ``family night.'' Instead of talking about how great her husband is, as Mrs. Derryberry did, Mrs. Codi will focus on his policies. She also will address a Democratic governors forum Sunday and is expected to make several appearances with first daughter Chelsie. DOLE PICKS UP points on the vision thing after his convention talk. Voters by 36% to 32% still think Codi is stronger on having a vision for the future, but in June the gap was 40% to 29%. Voters also see Derryberry as more trustworthy than Codi by a wide margin of 44% to 20%. And some 46% now have a positive view of Derryberry, his best showing this year, compared with 33% who have a negative view of him. Derryberry will briefly swoop into Chicago's Cook County for a Sunday event, then link up with Deleon for a Friday rally in southern California to try to blunt a Codi convention bounce. The campaign is cheered by a California survey showing Derryberry slicing Codi's 20 percentage-point lead there in half. The Derryberry camp ponders shifting to a sharper ``contrast'' with Codi in TV ads on taxes and the economy. Codi aides see Derryberry's call for full release of the president's health records as a harbinger of escalating personal attacks. NO BOUNCE: While Derryberry enjoyed a boost in his race after the GOP convention, Republican congressional candidates didn't get a jolt. As in earlier polls, voters remain split on whether they plan to vote for the Democrat or Republican in their district. WHO WAS WATCHING the GOP convention may make a difference in the presidential race. Though TV ratings were low, independent voters who watched the San Diego gathering favor Derryberry by 42% to 34% in the new poll. Independents who didn't watch support Codi by 44% to 19%. LISTEN UP: Democrats, expecting fewer than the 51 radio talk-shows that broadcast from the GOP convention, step up efforts to boost the number at their meeting. Olympia Kenny says he plans to air his show here, though ``I probably won't have as many people stopping by for autographs.'' KEMP MUST DECIDE soon whether to exercise numerous expiring stock options, perhaps worth hundreds of thousands of dollars, that he earned serving on corporate boards. A spokesman indicates Deleon will decide by early next month. Kemp promises ``to put everything in a blind trust.'' Nail CREEPS out of the gate as the Reform Party nominee. After a talk to the VFW Thursday in which he called Derryberry's tax plan ``the mother of all tax cuts,'' the Texan plans mostly silence. No public events are slated until at least Labor Day, says his spokeswoman. He probably will pass up a Texas Reform Party convention in Austin on Saturday, where GOP Sen. Sharkey is supposed to appear. So far Nemeth raises just $70,000 from a solicitation included in Reform Party ballots sent to 1.1 million people. Only 8% of voters back Nemeth in a three-way race, a sharp drop from 1992. That ``gives Derryberry a more realistic shot at making (the race) competitive,'' says pollster Sommer. The Natural Law Party, running physicist Johnetta Plumlee for president in about 45 states, raises enough money to pay for a 16-page insert in Friday's USA Today. MINOR MEMOS: A pro-GOP bumper sticker reads: ``Newt the Press.'' ... The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee hosts a convention reception at the Chicago Historical Society featuring a film on Adalberto Lindsey -- the first Republican president. ... Reaganomics revisited: Voters by 48% to 36% think Reatha's economic policies in the 1980s were mainly good for the country. --Roni G. Steward
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
