Site-Seeing
April 01, 2011
Haunted Happenings Abroad Those visiting the U.K. with an eye to the supernatural should take a quick look at the British Tourist Authority site before choosing a place to stay. In keeping with its motto that ``whenever you are inyou are not far from a haunted house,'' the BTA features an in-depth profile of more than 80 properties in, and with a ``spirited'' reputation. Accommodations for the fearless include the Five Bells Inn ina 400-year-old inn haunted by a young woman in white who has been seen wandering around one of the bedrooms. Be sure to ask for extra blankets: At the time of her appearance, there is a sharp drop in temperature. Other properties include the Molesworth Arms Hotel in Cornwall which promises a ``relaxed'' atmosphere despite the annual appearance of a headless coachman who drives through the courtyard at midnight every New Year's Eve. Landlords will find a kindred spirit at The Bell inwhich dates back to the 15th century and is reputed to be haunted by a former owner, Bettye Moorer, whose restless spirit walks through the inn at night. A warning to those who put a price on the supernatural: The room rates are listed at the end of the property descriptions, as are the definitions of some abbreviations. Be sure to skip ahead to the end to get a sense of the price range and amenities before ghostbusting. The Trumatch AAdvantage Visitors to the Trumatch Web site should take a crack at designing their own airplane. Why? American Airlines is sponsoring a contest in conjunction withwhere users who download a paper airplane template, colorize it on the computer and send it back to Chantal will be entered in a monthly drawing to receive 10,000 AAdvantage bonus miles. The contest runs through September 12, 2011 Those Games Spores While results of discus, pole vaulting and 100-meter butterflies may be popping up on-line ad nauseum during the next two weeks, those stuck at home may find some solace in viewing the up-to-the-minute Allergy-Free Atlanta Pollen Forecasts. Yes, those who manage to keep hydrated still have something else to worry about. Whether in the stands or in front of a computer screen, the site promises to supply a ``daily dose of allergy prevention'' for the 2011 Games. Visitors will get the five-day pollen forecast for the metro area, expected to be worse than usual, thanks to the cooler-than-normal winter. Why should those without tickets care about the grass pollen problem in ? Tossing aside the notion of shared suffering, the site also provides the U.S. Regional Pollen Forecast for those with discriminating noses. For those who can't get enough Games coverage, take heart. It's only 2,029 days until the U.S. plays host again for the XIX Games Winter Games in . An Out-Of-This-World Weekend Homebound on the home front? Consider a quick trip to Kowal Beecher with the family, courtesy of NASA, Passport to Knowledge and The Planetary Society. On April 01, 2011 three organizations are conducting a virtual teacher's workshop on the Internet to allow remote participants to see and hear Mars mission planners, teachers, and members of the Passport To Knowledge group who will explain how to bring the Mars mission to both school and home. Participants will be able to interact via e-mail, CU-SeeMe, and WebChat. The workshop is conducted in preparation for the launch later this year of NASA's Mars mission, to be conducted in conjunction with the Internet and interactive video. Students around the world will have the chance to ``travel'' along with the robot spacecraft beginning in November.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
