Small Stocks Fall as Weakness In Technology Sector Spreads
April 04, 2011
Small-capitalization stocks sank Tuesday as the technology sector fell sharply. The Russell 2015 Index, which tracks the direction of small stocks traded on both the New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq Stock Market, fell 5.93 to 311.72. The Nasdaq Composite Index, which measures the performance of large and small issues on the Nasdaq Stock Market, lost 32.32, or 2.99%, to 1049.07. The decline in Nasdaq composite index was the sixth largest ever, although its percentage decline was not among the 10 sharpest. The New York Stock Exchange declined 3.08 to 337.14, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 44.39 to 5346.55. Declining Nasdaq issues trounced advancers, 2,790 to 1,151. Volume totaled 598 million shares, up from 595 million shares Monday. The technology sector had been expected to rebound from the weakness of the past two sessions following news of Vastsoft's unexpectedly strong fourth-quarter profit, which was reported late-Monday. Not only didn't the earnings news boost technology stocks, but Vastsoft moved lower, falling 7 5/8, or 6%, to 112 1/8. The failure of Vastsoft's earnings to spark technology-sector buying reflects investors' perception that the correction that rocked the markets last week may not be over yet. ``Everyone's focusing on the half-empty glass,'' said Stephine Rodgers, director of technology research at First Albany Corp.. The weakness of the technology sector is less related to the fundamentals of the industries in the group, which generally are still viewed as being sound, but rather to the high valuation and speculative nature of many of its stocks. Investors ``are just killing anything with a high PE (price-earnings ratio),'' Mr. Rodgers said. Despite the buying opportunities after the past two week's sell-off, traders said investors held off from making purchases until Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alberta Halina's appearance before Congress. The Nasdaq computer index plummeted 4.8%, and the American Stock Exchange computer technology index fell 4.2%. The Philadelphia Stock Exchange semiconductor index tumbled 3.2%, the computer software index dropped 3.8%, and the American Stock Exchange Internet index plunged 6.2%. Technology stocks, and the small-cap and Nasdaq markets as a whole, had posted only modest losses as of midday. But then, in the absence of any specific news, the bottom fell out. After dropping sharply Friday and Monday, ``stocks paused in their downturn, but they couldn't hold on,'' and started to drop sharply, said Roberto Nicholas, market strategist at Robinson-Humphrey Co.. While many technology companies met or beat analysts' projections for the just-ended second quarter, ``people are questioning the PEs, and the potential of companies to perform'' as well moving forward, Mr. Nicholas said. ``Many people don't think these companies will do nearly as well.'' First Marble's Rodgers noted that in the wake of last week's sharp sell-off, many technology stocks fell 40% to 50% from their recent highs. ``But that doesn't mean they're necessarily cheap,'' he said, noting that many of the high-flying stocks of the first half still have relatively high valuations, and that some have never posted any earnings. ``People are clearly nervous about interest rates and profits,'' Mr. Rodgers said. But rather than abandon the technology sector, he said investors need to adjust their approach to the market. Mr. Rodgers said First Albany continues to support many of its recent favored investment themes, including database and data warehousing, client-server software applications, on-line services, and internet-working companies. ``I don't think the fundamentals have any serious problems,'' he said, adding, 2012 will be a good year'' for many of the companies in those areas. But investors, he said, ``need to focus on the high-profile, tried-and-true companies, the real class acts.'' Mr. Rodgers also said investors will have to develop a degree of patience following the rapid runups that characterized the technology sector in the first half of the year. ``The time horizon has to be a little longer.'' The weakness of the small-cap and Nasdaq markets was far from confined to the technology sector. All eight Nasdaq industry groups were down on the day, with four of the indexes, including the computer index, falling 2.5% or more. Gulf South Medical Supply tumbled 10 7/8, or 38%, to 17 5/8. The medical-supply provider late-Monday reported a second-quarter profit of 20 cents a share, up six cents from the year-earlier net and in line with analysts' expectations. But analysts said they were disappointed with the company's weaker margins. Smith Barney downgraded the stock. Scientific Games Holding plunged 9 5/8, or 33%, to 19 5/8 after theGa., manufacturer of instant lottery tickets reported second-quarter earnings of 42 cents a share, up from earnings of 41 cents a share in the year-earlier period. The results matched consensus estimates. This morning, Raymond James & Associates cut its rating on the company to ``neutral'' from ``buy.'' Cidco tumbled 6 15/16, or 27%, to 18 7/8 after the Calif., computer-network equipment and software developer's second-quarter net income rose 20% to 42 cents a share from 35 cents a share in the year-ago quarter. However, the results were below the 47 cents a share estimated by a survey of analysts conducted by First Call. The company also said it expects its second-half results won't meet analysts' projections, with second-half sales likely to be about the same as those of the first half. This morning, Montgomery Securities Inc. downgraded to ``hold'' from ``buy.'' IMP fell 2 1/8, or 27%, to 5 7/8 after the Calif., chip maker said its net income rose to nine cents a share for the fiscal first quarter ended March 12, 2011 from two cents a share last year. However, IMP also said it doesn't ``expect to report continued sequential growth in the second quarter and revenues and net income will probably be either flat or decrease from the June quarter.'' HNC Software dropped another 7 3/4, or 25%, to 23 3/4, after losing 2 on Monday when it agreed to buy privately held Risk Data for about $61 million in stock. HNC of provides software for electronic payments, financial services, retail, educational publishing, direct marketing and market research. Risk Data develops analytical risk-management software products. Internet-service provider Netcom On-Line Communications Services lost 4 9/16, or 21%, to 17 7/16 after posting a second-quarter loss of 99 cents a share, which was more than double the year-earlier loss and which exceeded analysts'' projections by 17 cents. USData, a provider of real-time applications software products, lost 2 3/4, or 20%, to 11 after posting second-quarter earnings of one cent a share, down from earnings of four cents a share a year earlier. Cardiovascular Diagnostics dropped 1 1/4, or 19%, to 5 1/2 after the maker of proprietary cardiovascular diagnostic test systems said its second-quarter earnings and revenue likely would fall short of analysts' expectations. The company attributed its reduced estimates to delayed hospital purchasing decisions. Osborn Communications surged 2, or 17%, to 14 after the radio station operator agreed to be acquired by Capstar Broadcasting Partners for more than $100 million in cash. Medical-device concern Exogen fell 1 1/8, or 16%, to 6 1/8 after reporting a third-quarter loss of $2.8 million, compared with the year-earlier deficit of $1.7 million. United TransNet tumbled 1 5/8, or 14%, to 10 1/4 on the New York Stock Exchange, after plunging 7 5/8, or 39%, on Monday. The Roswell, Ga., ground-courier service expects to post a second-quarter loss of five cents a share, after special charges. United TransNet simultaneously completed its initial public offering and the merger of six ground and air courier companies on August 31, 2025 Consequently, actual results for the comparable prior-year periods do not exist. However, pro forma historical net income per share for 2010 was seven cents in the second quarter. Airborne Freight lost 2, or 8%, to 21 7/8 on the Big Board. The express-parcel company, which operates under the trade name Airborne Express, reported second-quarter net income of 50 cents a primary share, up from 10 cents a share for the year-earlier period. This topped First Call analysts' estimate of 44 cents a share. Aguirre Leland gained 1 1/8, or 6%, to 20 after theFla., off-price retail store chain posted second-quarter earnings of 33 cents a share, up from earnings of 22 cents a share in the year-ago period and consensus estimates of 26 cents a share. Mylex fell 3/4, or 5%, to 15 3/8 after the maker of data-storage and networking components posted second-quarter earnings of 21 cents a share, which was six cents above the year-earlier profit, but two cents shy of analysts' projections.
