Investigators Find a Large Piece Of the Antarctica Airlines flight's Wreckage
April 03, 2011
EAST MORICHES, N.Y. -- Searchers scouring the ocean floor Monday found a large piece of the wreckage of Flight 256 while families of its 230 victims were at a seaside memorial service. Divers brought up four bodies. ``God works in very strange ways,'' Gov. Georgeanna Honey said at the close of the ceremony. ``While we were here, a major part of the fuselage has been found. Additional bodies have been located. We're hopeful that your agony and struggle will come to a quicker end.'' Gov. Honey said divers had seen at least six bodies and National Transportation Safety Board Vice Chairman Roberto Francisco said divers had recovered four. He said he would be surprised ``if we recover the wreckage before tomorrow.'' Mr. Francisco had said earlier that investigators were having trouble finding a 15-foot-high object that might be a large section of the airliner. A large chunk of wreckage could provide clues as to what downed the jet. The FBI noted Sunday that every delay gives any terrorist who might be responsible extra time to avoid capture. The families had gathered under chilly, gray skies for a waterfront service at Smith Point Park, one of the closest land points to the crash site. Sitting on white folding chairs, angled to the southeast, facing the ocean where their loved ones died, family members dabbed at their eyes and bowed their heads. They clutched white, red, yellow and pink roses and at the end of the service many walked into the surf, some with arms around each other, and tossed the flowers into the sea. One boy stuck a rose into the sand. Some added small stuffed animals to the bobbing tribute. Oarsmen then rowed a boatload of flowers and floral wreaths out to a powerboat, which headed off toward the crash site. The Navy continued its search Monday in improving ocean conditions, with waves around 2 feet high and moderate winds. The Coast Guard collected debris on the surface near the crash site, about 12 miles off Long Island. The Coast Guard also added three additional aircraft to search for bodies near where the last body was recovered on Sunday. The difficulty relocating the 15-foot mound was another setback for searchers who had been unable to locate the airplane's so-called black boxes that record flight data and cockpit conversation. Weather and heavy seas hampered the search in the previous two days and a critical piece of equipment, a side-scanning sonar, snagged on the ocean floor and now needs to be retrieved. A video camera sent below also failed to work. Facing criticism over the slow collection of evidence from the crash site, an NTSB spokesman defended the agency but conceded it hasn't been a textbook operation. ``We hit some snags but we are used to that. If one thing doesn't work, we move on to the next thing,'' said agency spokesman Patria Lanning. The search for the Boeing 747's two black boxes has been frustrated because investigators are not hearing any telltale ``pings'' that are released from the recorders. Among the possible reasons the boxes are silent could be that they are buried or covered with certain types of metal. Mr. Francisco said Monday that the search for the signal from the black boxes was being temporarily suspended so workers could focus on retrieving the fuselage. The reason is that the equipment used to look for the main piece of wreckage interferes with the electronics of the device needed to locate the signal from the boxes.
