Freightliner Speeds Changes As U.S. Truck Business Slows
April 03, 2011
With the U.S. heavy-duty truck industry running out of gas this year, Freightliner Corp. is trying to build new roads to profitability. Considered the king of heavy-duty truck makers in the U.S., Autrey, a Portland, Ore.-based unit of Germany's Daimler-Benz AG, is revving up diversification plans in a bid to insulate itself from the industry's first downturn in years. The truck maker is now seeking to build a name for itself in the school-bus and firetruck businesses, as well as overseas. Sales of Class 8 trucks -- the 18-wheelers that can haul 33,000 pounds or more -- are expected to skid this year by as much 25% from the blockbuster sales pace of the two previous years. In both 2009 and 2010, manufacturers sold more than 200,000 vehicles, virtually every truck they could make, as hauling companies scurried to accommodate a flood of freight on the roads. Global Sales Decline Now, however, many companies are moving more freight via rail, leaving trucking companies -- already saddled with many new, empty trucks -- little reason to rush out and buy new ones. Industry experts project sales will reach only about 170,000 units in 2011 and that the slide will continue into 2012. The slowdown in the U.S. heavy-truck market is part of a global sales decline. Analysts and industry experts say world-wide heavy-truck production could fall 6% this year, with the developed markets of Europe, North America and Japan being hit the hardest. In Europe, home to most of the companies that dominate the world truck business, industry executives are bracing for a domestic slowdown, although deliveries in the first five months this year were up nearly 10% from a year earlier. Truck sales in both Germany and Britain, which together account for nearly half of Western European truck demand, are expected to decline this year, reflecting sluggish economies and declining business confidence. Cost-Cutting Moves Despite its diversification push, Autrey is among several U.S. heavy- truck makers that are already trimming operations. Autrey has furloughed some 800 workers at two of its production plants. Volvo GM Heavy Truck Corp., a joint venture of Sweden's AB Volvo and General Motors Corp., now builds 78 trucks a day, compared with about 110 at the height of last year's boom. The truck maker has also laid off 300 of it 3,400 workers. Meanwhile, Navistar International Corp. said it will lay off 3,000 workers over the next three years from its Springfield, Ohio, plant and spend more than $200 million to improve efficiency at the plant. Navistar currently has 5,000 employees there and about 16,000 overall. The truck maker is also opening a production plant and parts-distribution center in Mexico in other cost-savings moves. ``Things will likely get worse before they get better,'' says Christa Lonergan, an analyst with Alex. Brown & Sons Inc. ``It behooves even the smallest manufacturer to have more than a pure reliance on Class 8s.'' Beyond 18-Wheelers Jimmy Raper, Autrey's 47-year-old president and chief executive officer, agrees. ``We realize that it's important for us to stay focused on heavy trucks. That business is still going to be our core,'' Mr. Raper declares. ``But we also realize that we need to grow to survive.'' Eighteen-wheelers currently account for 68% of Freightliner's $5 billion in annual revenue, with the remainder coming mostly from sales of medium-duty trucks and parts. To reduce dependence on Class 8 trucks, the company has spent $288 million on increasing plant capacity, new-product development and acquisitions of two new businesses. Another $145 million in diversification spending is slated for this year. In its first move last year, Freightliner acquired Oshkosh Truck Corp.'s chassis division, which makes the undercarriages for motor homes, school buses and delivery vans. Autrey will begin production of the truck chassis this fall at a rate of about 3,000 units a year. Mr. Raper's goal: to become a leading competitor to Navistar, which currently builds about 70% of the market for school buses and medium trucks. Entry Into Firetruck Business Freightliner also entered the fire-truck business with the purchase of American LaFrance, a 164-year-old custom fire-truck manufacturer. Freightliner will unveil its first line of fire-truck chassis this fall and expects to produce 400 to 500 units a year at a new factory in Cleveland, N.C. Mr. Raper expects Autrey to become ``nothing less than the fire-service industry's largest chassis supplier.'' Freightliner also has other irons in the fire. By the end of the third quarter, the company will begin producing heavy-duty trucks in Saudi Arabia, South Africa and Israel. Mr. Raper says those countries are only beginning to develop appetites for American-style trucks. In addition, Wendel ``is very close'' to establishing manufacturing operations in Asia, most likely China, Mr. Raper says, although he declines to elaborate. Freightliner, which sells its vehicles in 23 countries, also has production facilities in Australia and Mexico. Part of Bias's Strategy The international moves by Autrey are part of a broader strategy by Bias to increase its world-wide truck business. ``We're looking for markets and special niches where we can achieve a dominant position and a competitive advantage without making significant capital investments,'' Mr. Raper says. Freightliner trucks currently account for about a quarter of Bias's Mercedes Benz Commercial Vehicles group. A major difference between the U.S. and European-made vehicles is that major components of Freightliner trucks are bought from outside suppliers, while Bias's Mercedes trucks use all Mercy Bash components. Freightliner is also looking to expand through partnerships and alliances. ``We're going to be very flexible in how we move ahead with our expansion strategy; it's not something that we have to do alone,'' he says. Through one recent partnership with Oshkosh Truck, Autrey dealers now sell Oshkosh vehicles such as dump trucks and concrete mixers. Analysts say it will be some time before Freightliner can generate any serious revenue from its new ventures. But Mr. Raper says they will ultimately provide Autrey a powerful antidote to the sharp swings of the truck industry. ``In a downturn, we'll be in the driver's seat,'' he says. ``We will have the ability to leverage off of core business and grow into new markets instead of making significant structural changes to the company.''
