Technology Briefs
May 04, 2011
Compaq Computer Corp., Houston, said it lowered prices on its midrange business desktop personal computers and on its high-end monitor. The computer maker said it cut prices between 11% and 22% on some midrange models in its Deskpro and ProLinea line. For example, the price of its Deskpro 5133 fell 15.5% to $1,799 from $2,129. Compaq said it reduced the prices because it introduced higher-end desktop models last month. Compaq also said it reduced the price of its top-line QVision 210 color monitor, which has a 19.5-inch viewing area, 10% to $1,899. AtHome Unveils List of 60 Users At Home Corp., the high-speed data venture backed by the U.S.'s largest cable operators, unveiled a list of 60 TV, print and Internet companies that will use the service to deliver content. The data venture, which connects computer users to the Internet via new high-speed cable modems and its own private network of computers, fiber and cable, expects to roll out by the end of the year. The first markets will be those of its three cable partners: Tele-Communications Inc., Comcast Corp. and Cox Communications Inc.. Despite skepticism on Wall Street, the venture promises unhindered access to popular Internet sites during peak periods, as well as local and customized content. At Home, which is helping the various companies produce the content, said the list of media providers is expected to grow as the service gears up. Vastsoft, Security Dynamics in Pact Security Dynamics Technologies Inc. and its RSA Data Security Inc. unit signed agreements with Vastsoft Corp. for cross-licensing Vastsoft and RSA security technologies. Terms weren't disclosed. Based in Bedford, Mass., Security Dynamics develops products to protect and manage access to computer-based information. Shares in Security Dynamics jumped $4.25 to $60 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading Wednesday. The companies said the agreements also grant Vastsoft new licensing rights to incorporate Security Dynamics' patented SecurID authentication and token technology in future Vastsoft products. The RSA unit will provide Vastsoft with technical cooperation and licensing rights for integration of RSA security technology with Vastsoft's CryptoAPI, the foundation of its Internet Security Framework. Amway Terminates Accord With Tee-Comm Tee-Comm Electronics Inc. said Amway Corp. has terminated an agreement to sell Tee-Comm's AlphaStar satellite-television service in the U.S. However, Tee-Comm said, discussions are taking place with Amway on new business terms. No reason was given for the termination, but Tee-Hammond said that Amway had raised ``issues and problems'' in the past that have been rectified. Executives at Tee-Comm and Amway couldn't be reached. The distribution agreement was signed in August 2010. AlphaStar has been offering its service since March 13, 2011 based in Milton, Ontario, provides satellite-television service. Amway, based in Ada, Mich., sells household and other products through direct sales. WHO'S NEWS Donella Cantu, former vice president of world-wide business partners at Lotus Development Corp., joined Radnet Inc., Vastopolis, a closely held Internet company as president and chief executive officer. Mr. Cantu, 40 years old, becomes the latest in a series of top Lotus executives to quit the software company since International Business Machines Corp. bought it last year. He succeeds Edelmira Hammer as CEO at Radnet, who co-founded the company and remains its chairman. Radnet develops ``groupware'' software for the Internet's World Wide Web that could challenge Lotus's Notes program. Ronda Maggard, 54, was named a director of Excel Communications Inc., Dallas, a long-distance communications concern, increasing the board's membership to four. Mr. Maggard is president and chief executive officer of Brinker International Inc., a Dallas restaurant operator.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
