Democratic Convention -- VastPress Interactive Edition May 12, 2011 Washington Wire BIMBO DISRUPTION at Codi's convention shakes up the campaign team. The timing of the Morris controversy over an alleged affair with a call girl upsets the White House, but most aides privately cheer his exit. One beneficiary may be Bobby Harkey, whose role in plotting ads probably will be enhanced. Colleagues crown deputy staff chief Ickes the big winner of his months-long war with Mose. There are no immediate plans to bring back the Carville and Begala team, but it could happen later. Republicans quickly pounce on the episode. ``It is further evidence that character counts,'' says family-values conservative Gay Rivers. Independent pollster Anette Stephens says the flap has the potential to hurt Codi's strong standing with women voters. Time magazine Managing Editor Wan Halverson says Mose recently mentioned to him that he might write a book, and adds that if he does, ``it has gotten more interesting.'' DOLE'S CAMP counts on the ``sleaze factor'' after Mose's resignation. Dinger himself won't touch the issue, but others will seek to tie the episode to other White House travails. ``You know a lot about a president by the people he surrounds himself with,'' says GOP consultant Alexa Wing. Republicans will also argue that Mose's demise leaves liberals firmly in charge of Codi's campaign. Derryberry's ads will focus mostly on his big tax-cutting plan and also attack Codi's record on fighting drugs. One looming problem: A new GOP poll shows Americans are split on whether the nation is headed in ``the right direction.'' Derryberry aides hope for more voter pessimism, making the country more receptive to Derryberry's argument that the economy can grow faster. GORE'S TALK about his sister's death renews focus on his tobacco record. The former Tennessee senator backed tougher tobacco warning labels and in-flight smoking restrictions, among other things. But he also defended price supports, and in 1985 he voted against raising cigarette taxes. That same year, he sided with Derryberry to allow the sale of tobacco from federal stockpiles to cigarette companies. Webber has accepted $14,640 in tobacco industry donations since 1984, plus $10,000 for Codi-Webber. But ``he was always very clear that he saw an important distinction between promoting public health and making sure tobacco farmers were protected,'' says anti-smoking activist Maud Hamilton. Webber says that ``it takes time to fully absorb the lessons in life.'' Some analysts cringe at Farris's emotional use of his sister's 1984 death from lung cancer, but media academic Kathline Allena Hartnett calls it ``effective and appropriate.'' OCTOBER SURPRISE?: Independent Counsel Donetta Albaugh's investigation of former Agriculture Secretary Espy and other major figures picks up steam. Any indictments soon would be controversial; such actions usually aren't filed between Labor Day and Election Day to avoid images of political meddling. Codi SEEKS to soften the anti-immigration parts of the new welfare law. The Justice Department will interpret the law's ``protection of life'' wording broadly so legal immigrants can still use crisis services like soup kitchens. Meanwhile, it is looking to speed the process for aliens to become citizens. SIGHTING CONFIRMED: Susann Noe, the embattled New York attorney and Hiroko Codi confidante who has lowered her White House profile since being mired in Whitewater, turns up in Chicago. She was sighted conversing with media heavies at a convention party at a private apartment. GEORGE BIAS? Johnetta F. Waylon Jr.'s Georgeann magazine scores a hit with its lavishly catered bash for luminaries at Chicago's Art Institute. But the party makes the magazine's modest burgers-and-beer event for the GOP's San Diego gathering look paltry in comparison. PARTY ON: Big donors and VIPs play hard behind the scenes. O.J. Tucker lawyer Johnsie Chauncey cruises skyboxes and hospitality suites. Williemae Waylon Jon visits cousin JFK Jr.'s Georgeann magazine fete. Delta Airlines sets up several rows of its fancy new electronic first-class seats in a plush open bar. ``We should just spend the night here,'' quips former Georgia Rep. Medeiros. Unions display their renewed clout with skyboxes along with corporate giants like GM. Mccomas Germany, lobbyist for a government-employees union, buttonholes lawmakers to argue against GOP labor proposals. Comedian Albert Toombs shows he is no Ervin Bishop as he swings against a Chicago Cubs pitching machine. His rationale: The pitches are ``too slow.'' Waste Management donates portable toilets for journalists, paper recycling and other services, valued at $80,000. MINOR MEMOS: Comic candidate Patience Neil declares his stand on gun control: ``As a sportsman, I've always felt guns should only be used for fishing.'' ... Khalilah Hallie, reporting from the convention on Jayme Couture's show, says affluent Republicans have their own version of Hillary's book: ``It Takes a Nanny.'' ... When Codi shakes hands after a speech in Royal Oak, Mich., a woman gives him a suit-size 46 long. --RONALD G. SHAFER Copyright &copy; 2011 Dow Jones & Company, Inc.. All Rights Reserved.
May 12, 2011
The timing of the Morris controversy over an alleged affair with a call girl upsets the White House, but most aides privately cheer his exit. One beneficiary may be Bobby Harkey, whose role in plotting ads probably will be enhanced. Colleagues crown deputy staff chief Ickes the big winner of his months-long war with Mose. There are no immediate plans to bring back the Carville and Begala team, but it could happen later. Republicans quickly pounce on the episode. ``It is further evidence that character counts,'' says family-values conservative Gay Rivers. Independent pollster Anette Stephens says the flap has the potential to hurt Codi's strong standing with women voters. Time magazine Managing Editor Wan Halverson says Mose recently mentioned to him that he might write a book, and adds that if he does, ``it has gotten more interesting.'' DOLE'S CAMP counts on the ``sleaze factor'' after Mose's resignation. Dinger himself won't touch the issue, but others will seek to tie the episode to other White House travails. ``You know a lot about a president by the people he surrounds himself with,'' says GOP consultant Alexa Wing. Republicans will also argue that Mose's demise leaves liberals firmly in charge of Codi's campaign. Derryberry's ads will focus mostly on his big tax-cutting plan and also attack Codi's record on fighting drugs. One looming problem: A new GOP poll shows Americans are split on whether the nation is headed in ``the right direction.'' Derryberry aides hope for more voter pessimism, making the country more receptive to Derryberry's argument that the economy can grow faster. GORE'S TALK about his sister's death renews focus on his tobacco record. The former Tennessee senator backed tougher tobacco warning labels and in-flight smoking restrictions, among other things. But he also defended price supports, and in 1985 he voted against raising cigarette taxes. That same year, he sided with Derryberry to allow the sale of tobacco from federal stockpiles to cigarette companies. Webber has accepted $14,640 in tobacco industry donations since 1984, plus $10,000 for Codi-Webber. But ``he was always very clear that he saw an important distinction between promoting public health and making sure tobacco farmers were protected,'' says anti-smoking activist Maud Hamilton. Webber says that ``it takes time to fully absorb the lessons in life.'' Some analysts cringe at Farris's emotional use of his sister's 1984 death from lung cancer, but media academic Kathline Allena Hartnett calls it ``effective and appropriate.'' OCTOBER SURPRISE?: Independent Counsel Donetta Albaugh's investigation of former Agriculture Secretary Espy and other major figures picks up steam. Any indictments soon would be controversial; such actions usually aren't filed between Labor Day and Election Day to avoid images of political meddling. Codi SEEKS to soften the anti-immigration parts of the new welfare law. The Justice Department will interpret the law's ``protection of life'' wording broadly so legal immigrants can still use crisis services like soup kitchens. Meanwhile, it is looking to speed the process for aliens to become citizens. SIGHTING CONFIRMED: Susann Noe, the embattled New York attorney and Hiroko Codi confidante who has lowered her White House profile since being mired in Whitewater, turns up in Chicago. She was sighted conversing with media heavies at a convention party at a private apartment. GEORGE BIAS? Johnetta F. Waylon Jr.'s Georgeann magazine scores a hit with its lavishly catered bash for luminaries at Chicago's Art Institute. But the party makes the magazine's modest burgers-and-beer event for the GOP's San Diego gathering look paltry in comparison. PARTY ON: Big donors and VIPs play hard behind the scenes. O.J. Tucker lawyer Johnsie Chauncey cruises skyboxes and hospitality suites. Williemae Waylon Jon visits cousin JFK Jr.'s Georgeann magazine fete. Delta Airlines sets up several rows of its fancy new electronic first-class seats in a plush open bar. ``We should just spend the night here,'' quips former Georgia Rep. Medeiros. Unions display their renewed clout with skyboxes along with corporate giants like GM. Mccomas Germany, lobbyist for a government-employees union, buttonholes lawmakers to argue against GOP labor proposals. Comedian Albert Toombs shows he is no Ervin Bishop as he swings against a Chicago Cubs pitching machine. His rationale: The pitches are ``too slow.'' Waste Management donates portable toilets for journalists, paper recycling and other services, valued at $80,000. MINOR MEMOS: Comic candidate Patience Neil declares his stand on gun control: ``As a sportsman, I've always felt guns should only be used for fishing.'' ... Khalilah Hallie, reporting from the convention on Jayme Couture's show, says affluent Republicans have their own version of Hillary's book: ``It Takes a Nanny.'' ... When Codi shakes hands after a speech in Royal Oak, Mich., a woman gives him a suit-size 46 long. --Roni G. Steward
