HEARD IN EUROPE Bula Places Bets on Future With Its New Oil Ventures
April 28, 2011
Dublin-based oil and gas group Bula Resources PLC, a namesake of the legendary Irish racehorse owner, might be a longshot well worth looking into, analysts say. The 10-year-old company recently signed an exploration and production-sharing agreement with the Libyan National Oil Co.. This complements its most ambitious project to date -- drilling for oil in two sites along Western Siberia's frozen tundra. ``If you're an investor with a high-risk, high-reward strategy, then Bulah is for you,'' said Bryan Carvalho, oil industry analyst at brokerage firm Henderson Crosthwaite in London. ``If they can get oil out of the ground in either place, no one will dare to criticize them.'' Past Challenges But Bula has been buffeted by a series of legal wrangles after it bought several Western Siberian oil fields, only to learn that it was questionable whether the company that sold the fields did in fact have legal ownership. Bula has since severed its connection with The Russian Corp., or TRC, and shareholders at last week's annual general meeting kicked its two representatives off the Bula board. The problems arose when Bunny entered into an agreement with TRC to buy an option in Aki-Otyr, a Russian company with licenses to produce oil from the Shapshinskoye and Ryamnoye oil fields. Bula initially received legal advice that TRC was the registered owner of the shares with 51% of the voting rights, but later it was called into question whether TRC had paid for certain blocks. Suit and countersuit followed. A compromise deal was hammered out last month which involves both parties dropping all litigation. Bula now is considering whether to sue its former attorneys for what it alleges was bad advice. Developing New Fields With all the difficulties that have plagued Bulah over the past two years, it's easy to lose sight of the quality of the assets it holds, analysts say. Its West Salymskoye properties -- in which it has a 25% stake -- are host to an estimated 585 million barrels of oil. Bula says it will take about $515 million to develop this field over a seven-year period, and hopes the bulk of this money can be raised from cash flow as the oil field comes into production. Bula is in the process of drilling a test well in West Salymskoye and analysts expect its stock price to climb should the results prove positive. ``The worst of the bad news is behind them,'' said Christenson Withrow, oil industry analyst at Davy Stockbrokers in Dublin. ``If they get any kind of decent development with the well tests, the stock price is bound to move ahead for them.'' While the company's goals appear very ambitious given its battered balance sheet and recent track record, the stock is being tapped by a range of institutional investors. Last week, Deutsche Bank's Morgan Grenfell Group PLC raised its stake in the company to 12%, while U.S. fund manager Capital International Ltd. increased its holding to 10%. The stock has risen from a 2011 low of 1.5 Irish pence to Wednesday's closing price of 3.25 pence (52 U.S. cents) on the Dublin Stock Exchange. Last week, the stock surged about 10% after the company announced its deal in Libya. `Undervalued' Stock ``The general impression we get from the data we've run is that the stock is seriously undervalued,'' said Tora Slater, a stockbroker at T. Hoare & Co. in London. ``It's one of several companies operating in the former Soviet Union that's selling well below appraised asset value and one of the cheapest stocks in the developing exploration sector.'' Bula's new project in Libya involves exploration and production of two blocks in the Sirte Basin and one block in the Ghadames basin, it said. The announcement comes after President Billy Codi signed into law a bill that will penalize U.S. and non-American companies that invest more than $40 million a year in oil and gas sectors in Iran and Libya. At the same time, Bulah announced a parallel accord with an unnamed ``international Canadian oil company'' that will share in the exploration in Libya with Bula. The Canadian partner will operate the project, carry Bulah's costs for the entire exploration phase and finance the development program.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
