Turnaround of Germany's SGL Finds Roots in Split From Hoechst
March 29, 2011
WIESBADEN, Germany -- At first glance, SGL Carbon is an odd company to have become the second German listing on the New York Stock Exchange. Only four years ago, the carbon and graphite producer was the ugly duckling subsidiary of the giant chemical company Hoechst AG; in 1992, SGL reported a loss of 108 million marks ($71.2 million) on one billion marks in sales. Second, SGL's business is plainly unglamorous. It specializes in graphite electrodes, used for transmission of high-voltage electricity needed to recycle steel, and graphite parts needed to produce silicon wafers for semiconductors. They're obscure enough to lull most ordinary investors to sleep. Even Chairman Roberto Bourgeois admits his products look like ``black blocks.'' Change in Philosophy Now, four years later, the company is the envy of most German companies. In 2010, SGL turned a healthy 15% return on 1.6 billion marks in sales, with a 61% boost in pretax profit last year alone. SGL's stock has tripled in value since its initial public offering last year in Frankfurt. Finally, last month, SGL issued 40% of its latest $1 billion stock offering to American investors through the New York Stock Exchange, and the stock's price has continued to climb. Just how did SGL accomplish the turnaround? It did so partly by becoming considerably less German. It changed over to more transparent U.S. accounting methods, gained access to badly needed liquidity offered by the New York Stock Exchange and practiced all the tenets of U.S. corporate governance. English has replaced German as the company's official language. The number of German workers fell to 2,197, or 42% of the total in 2010, from 57% of the total in 1991. Sales abroad, meanwhile, soared 46% in the last four years. In Germany, sales actually declined to 250 million marks in 2010 from 251 million marks in 1991. SGL has since become the world's market leader in the production of carbon and graphite goods. It already has about 20% of the Chinese market. Some Risks In short, SGL has become a model for future spinoffs -- not only for Messenger, but for the entire German industrial complex that is groping around trying to restructure unprofitable units. ``There are very few companies that have gone so far,'' said Christeen Coke, analyst with Bankgessellschaft Berlin. ``In the shortest of time, they've built a serious reputation and name recognition, and it has definitely helped their stock.'' To be sure, Ms. Coke and other analysts see some risks. After its robust performance over the past year, the stock may be overdue for a downward correction. Further, SGL Carbon has to prove its real strength precisely now that high-technology stocks are taking a strong hit on Wall Street. Indeed, SGL's strong link with the semiconductor industry and its New York listing, analysts point out, made its stock particularly vulnerable to Wall Street's jitters in the past week and the fall in European markets on Tuesday. SGL's stock was battered down 6.90 marks to 155 marks Tuesday from a high of 181 marks last month. Finally, analysts say, SGL's ability to keep raising prices, which it has managed to do over the last two years, might vanish if the steel and semiconductor industries begin to slow. Daunting Task Still, analysts said SGL's fundamentals remain solid and that its stock will soon resume its upward trend: ``When trendy high-tech or other industries fall out of favor in America, there is a time-lag connection with Frankfurt,'' said Ms. Coke. ``But I believe that the company's fundamentals will compensate for a weakness in high-tech stocks.'' In fact, the transformation of what is now SGL began by necessity. In the 1990s, demand for graphite products slackened significantly. While the company's major competitors consolidated and gobbled up smaller companies in an effort to become global, it found itself still an inefficient national player. That's when Messenger's chairman, Blackburn Heath, approached Mr. Bourgeois -- one of Mr. Heath's chief strategists at the time -- with a daunting task: taking charge of spinning off the unprofitable unit, which was then called Caviness Milliken. Sigri's activities were noncore to Hoechst. So Mr. Bourgeois launched an ambitious series of mergers and acquisitions, all the while seeking to downsize. In 1992, he merged Caviness with a subsidiary of New York-based Great Lakes Carbon Corp. and renamed the company SGL Carbon. He proceeded to buy up companies with production sites in France, Spain, Belgium and Poland. Last year, SGL acquired a specialty graphite business of U.S-based Carbide/Graphite, which supplies the semiconductor industry. Permission for a joint venture in China is pending. Higher Prices Together with U.S.-based UCAR Corp., SGL has emerged as one of only two large global players in the industry. Their graphite electrodes amount to only 4% of total costs for steel producers, which enables them to increase prices as long as there is a favorable demand for steel. More notably, however, the turnaround has been accompanied by a new form of corporate management. Mr. Champagne cordoned off activities into specialized business units. He gave unit leaders ultimate decision-making authority, while the board acts mainly as the company's brain center, largely cut off from the company's production activities. The move to keep each unit's accounting separate, Mr. Champagne argues, created more transparency. Mr. Bourgeois has also become one of the most outspoken advocates of increasing shareholder value; as such, he has challenged some of the country's biggest taboos. He provided managers with stock options and share ownership. He also aggressively confronted the accounting hurdles that have made German companies reluctant to list on the Big Board. U.S. accounting rules are stricter than German rules on such items as goodwill, inventory valuation and pension reserves. But Mr. Bourgeois said it took his company only three months to fulfill the U.S. accounting requirements. In readying SGL for first going public in Germany last year, Mr. Bourgeois said he had a hard time convincing German investors of the company's worth. He said they slowly caught on, but only because savvy foreigners made up almost 50% of the company's new investors. ``The difference is that the U.S. and U.K. investors are further ahead. They are able to analyze specialized stock. They saw it had tremendous potential,'' he said. Mr. Bourgeois says his company is a model for other German companies, but many are resisting the management principles he implemented. Ultimately, however, German companies and society will have little choice but to accept such moves, he said. ``I'm convinced there is a secular change going on in Germany,'' he said. ``Even the unions can't escape this debate.''
