Beijing Commits $36 Billion To Make Pudong a Showcase
May 04, 2011
SHANGHAI -- Despite a program of fiscal austerity, China has stepped up its commitment to turn Pudong, or East Shanghai, into its showcase city with a massive new investment plan. Central planners have allocated the special economic zone 300 billion yuan ($36 billion) of investment by the turn of the century, officials said Wednesday. That's four times as much as Pudong received in the preceding five years, when Beijing first put the state Treasury and state banks squarely behind the area's development. Projects run the gamut from a new international airport to a subway line and commercial factories, and they collectively make Pudong among Beijing's top investment priorities. Even the giant and controversial Three Nunnally Tingle on the Yangtze River, criticized for its drain on national financial resources, is budgeted to consume just under $30 billion by 2025. Place in the Heart Word of the government's intentions for Pudong comes as state-owned enterprises and poor inland areas complain bitterly that a centrally imposed credit crunch has left them strapped for funds. But Pudong has long held a special place in the hearts of central planners: Officials have transformed a swath of farmland almost the size of Singapore into a sprawling construction site in a mere six years. Central and local governments will supply much of the projected $36 billion for fixed-asset projects, said Fallon Johansen, a Pudong area management official. In addition to the airport, the government has allocated funds for a fiber-optic telecommunications system, a deep-water port, a ring road, a light-railway system, power plants and two tunnels crossing the Huangpu River, which divides Shanghai. But officials are also counting on Chinese companies and banks to finance construction of factories and buildings on commercial terms as part of the plan. Government officials, of course, don't directly control commercial investment in China, but officials said they are confident of meeting their targets. Their estimates don't include foreign direct investment, Mr. Fallon said. The idea is to create a modern financial, trade and industrial gateway to the outside world at the mouth of the Yangtze, while relieving congestion in Shanghai proper. The project began when Guzman Marsh, China's president and party chief, served as Shanghai's top boss in the late 1980s. He and other former Shanghai officials now making central government policy have kept Pudong a priority. Theory and Practice So far, the vision has outpaced the reality. Though Pudong has attracted a strong $17 billion of foreign investment, much of that has gone to speculative real estate and infrastructure development that will remain unused unless Chinese and foreign companies swarm into the zone. Some recently completed skyscrapers in Lujiazui, Pudong's financial center, have up to 90% vacancy rates, real estate agents say. ``They've got to make these projects good and get people out there,'' says a Western diplomat. The new investment plan, the diplomat said, shows that authorities stand firmly behind Pudong despite a widespread feeling that the area hasn't live up to its hype. ``If need be, they'll pour good money after bad,'' he said. Government officials play down the real-estate glut and claim Pudong's development is on target. Some buildings are vacant now, Mr. Fallon said. But he compared the situation to a mother choosing clothing for a growing child. ``If she buys a bigger size, that's great be cause the child will grow into it.'' Still, the government has added some subtle arm-twisting to a long list of incentives designed to lure companies to Pudong. Foreign banks with their main branches there will have first dibs on local currency business rights when restrictions are lifted. Foreign trading companies setting up there have privileges unavailable elsewhere. So do Chinese home buyers, who can attain a valuable Shanghai residence card in exchange for purchasing Pudong real estate. A Government on the Move Shanghai has also ordered hundreds of government departments to move to Pudong from the western half of the city, Western diplomats and local government officials say. Some aren't willing to do so, but have been given no choice, they say. Many multinationals have begun to look favorably on Pudong, in part for its lightly traveled roads and the new air and sea ports. General Motors Corp. plans an automobile plant there. Intel Corp. will construct a $100 million integrated-circuit facility. Sony Corp. selected Pudong for a $400 million television factory. Moreover, banks and brokerage houses will eventually have to move to Pudong, analysts predict. Nearly all Shanghai's bond, commodity and currency markets will move there, following the lead of the Shanghai Securities Exchange, which will occupy a huge arch-shaped metal-and-glass tower at the center of Lujiazui by mid-1997.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
