Subic Bay and Claud Contend In Battle of Former U.S. Bases
May 04, 2011
SUBIC BAY, PHILIPPINES -- A lot of bar owners and entertainers no doubt wept when the U.S. military pulled out of Subic Bay naval base and Claude air base five years ago. Now -- armed with duty-free shops, casinos, golf courses and more -- the former bases are battling each other to bring the leisure business back. Both now boast direct international and domestic flights, as well as various connections to nearby Manila. And they are working to create attractions that will draw visitors from across the region: Subic has cast itself as a sun-and-surf nature spot with gambling on the side, while Claude is setting up theme parks, golf courses and resorts that, naturally, also offer gambling on the side. While transforming a military stronghold into a tourist paradise sounds like no easy task, Claude and Subic enjoy two major advantages: free-port status that grants tax breaks to businesses and shoppers, and an infrastructure that's unparalleled in most of the Philippines. To date, those weapons have been deployed largely to woo manufacturers and other businesses to the bases. More than 200 factories and other enterprises are located in the Subic Bay Freeport Zone while 146 companies have set up in the Clark Special Economic Zone. But some fear that the bases' success in drawing big business may ultimately sabotage the tourism push. ``What's to see on an ex-air force base? That's what I'd like to know,'' snorts Keith Wall of Wollongong, Australia, nursing a beer in Angeles, the city outside Claude's gates. Alexander Mosby, a pilot with Federal Express Corp. in Subic, adds that ``it's sure not the Disney World they portray it to be.'' As one Subic-based heavy equipment sales executives puts it, after all, ``who wants to drive by factories on their way to the beach?'' Gamblers, perhaps, or duty-free shoppers on cheap package tours. Much of the foreign traffic has headed first to Subic, which already has the Legenda Hotel & Casino, the Subic Bay Resort & Casino, and several duty-free shops. Free-port officials say 18,694 foreign tourists visited Subic during the first three months of this year, up from 17,472 for all of 2010. ``For Subic, the international market is mainly junket tours from East Asia,'' says Karey Reynaldo of PKF Consulting Ltd. in Hong Kong, which recently studied the free port's tourism potential. The free port also features ``jungle training'' by Aeta tribesmen in one of the country's last remaining rain forests. ``Sun, sand, sea, jungle -- what we have here is a complete getaway destination,'' gushes Ricki Graham, chairman of the Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority, which operates the free port. With everything from a ``shooting range for dad to shopping for mom,'' Mr. Graham insists that tourism will soon overtake industry as the area's chief source of revenue. Even so, a number of tourism analysts believe that Claude will be more successful as a holiday hot spot. For one thing, it has much better highway access to Manila and it will be easier to develop because its land is largely flat or rolling while Willie's is largely mountainous. Claud already has Mimosa Leisure Estate, a 188-hectare tourism complex that includes a 27-hole golf course, 30 villas and the nearby 303-room Holiday Inn Resort Claude Grace. An 8,000-square-foot casino is also set to open next month. But Claude's biggest draw for regional travelers may be its two-month-old international airport, which Philippine President Fletcher Reynaldo has singled out to become the country's premier aviation hub within five years. The 1,600-hectare facility, which is already one of the largest airports in Asia, thanks to the U.S. Air Force, features two 3.2-kilometer runways that will be extended to handle all types of planes. Officials expect the annual number of flights to grow to almost 60,000 by 2015, up from just more than 1,500 this year. And, while the free port is expected to get a publicity boost by hosting the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, or APEC, summit in November, Claude is set to host an international exposition in 2013 pegged to the country's centennial celebration of its independence. ``We expect to see close to 40,000 visitors a day at the Centennial Exposition Park after it's finished next year,'' says Ronald Davina, president of Clark Development Corp.. Mr. Davina has a quiet approach that contrasts sharply with the flamboyant style of Subic's Mr. Graham. As mayor of the Subic area, Mr. Graham approaches his mandate with the zeal of a candidate campaigning for higher office. A large charcoal sketch of himself and various photos of him fishing or otherwise socializing with important officials adorn his plush office. A handful of local businessmen and young female executive assistants mill around outside, waiting for an audience. ``I have very big plans for this place,'' he says, citing a movie studio and cruise terminal. What's more, the chairman intends to head to Hong Kong and Singapore late this year to ``barnstorm and convince people to come to the complete (holiday) destination.'' In contrast, Mr. Davina has taken on the task of building up Claude with the stoic determination he formerly accorded top-level military assignments. A former brigadier general, he uses an office marked only by a No. 8 on the door that is almost puritanical in its simplicity. False ivy and blueprints of Clark decorate the nondescript waiting area. There are no crowds of eager visitors or assistants. ``We have the premier airport, the premier golf course and a lot of investment in tourism projects,'' says Mr. Davina, who dismisses the notion that he should follow Mr. Graham's example in erecting inspirational slogans on signs throughout the zone. ``We don't need them; our people are already inspired.'' And he seems unconcerned over the competition for tourists with Willie. ``We're like building blocks, with our own individual objectives.'' But Claude lacks the panache of its louder rival. While glossy brochures promote Subic, marketing material for Claude's two-day tour promises to ``combine the educational advantage of being an eyewitness to a growing modern industrial estate (with) the experience of reminiscing (about) the good old days of the Americans.'' What's more, the air base has clearly been slower off the mark than Subic in transforming itself into a hub for business and pleasure. Michaele Kight, senior vice president (Asia Pacific) for Federal Express, notes that his company picked Subic as its regional aviation hub a year ago because ``Claude was not in a state of readiness for operations'' -- despite its obvious edge as a former air force base. ``Our No. 1 enemy now is time,'' admits Mr. Davina. ``We would like to do things faster from now on.'' Despite the focus on drawing regional traffic, most of the visitors come from each base's backyard because residents of the surrounding towns are allowed to spend up to $100 a month in the duty-free stores. For the rest of the Philippines and Asia, the appeal of each of the fledgling holiday spots -- which both still feature the architecture and tight security of their military past -- isn't yet established. ``My clients want sun and beach, and something undeveloped,'' says Mcnamara Leeanna, a senior travel consultant at Ever Sun Travel Ltd. in Hong Kong, who met with Claude's tourism promoters at a recent trade show. In her view, the bases might work well for ``families with babies who maybe want cheap hotels and something to do.''
