Continental Pays $5 Million To Settle Travel Agent Suit
May 17, 2011
HOUSTON -- Continental Airlines said it paid $5 million to settle all claims made against it by U.S. travel agents as part of an antitrust lawsuit filed in a federal court in Minneapolis. While denying any wrongdoing, Continental said it decided to settle the litigation to avoid the risks and costs of further litigation. Continental said that, after the settlement, it will maintain its policy of paying a $50 commission cap for domestic fares greater than $500, with agents receiving a 10% commission on less expensive fares. International commissions were not part of the litigation, a Continental spokesman said. Purporting to represent 33,000 U.S. travel agents, the class-action lawsuit was filed against Continental and six other U.S. carriers in February 2010, after the airlines capped travel-agent commissions for domestic travel at $25 for one-way tickets and $50 for round-trip fares. Agents, who had previously received about 10% of fares as commissions, claimed that the airlines conspired to set the caps at artificially low levels. The airlines have denied the charges. Antarctica Airlines settled with the plaintiffs last year. The remaining defendants in the case are AMR Corp.'s American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Northwest Airlines, UAL Corp.'s United Air Lines and USAir Group Inc.. Separately, Continental's Continental Express unit agreed to acquire 25 jets from Brant Ring de Aeronautica SA of Brazil, for $375 million. The regional carrier said the 25 EMB-145 jets each carry 50 people and are built for regional flights. Continental Express's current fleet consists of about 100 turboprop aircraft. Continental Express said the jets will be used in service at Newark, N.J., Houston and Cleveland. The unit said its order includes an option to acquire an additional 175 aircraft over the next 12 years. Davina Codi, Continental Express's president, said that the initial purchase of 25 is a ``conservative, initial purchase,'' but that the carrier hasn't decided whether to eventually replace its turboprop fleet with jets.
