Russian Military Disputes Chechnya Cease-Fire Pact
April 26, 2011
GROZNY, Russia -- The Russian military denied Wednesday that it had agreed to a cease-fire with Chechen separatists, erasing hopes for a quick end to the bloody battle that has left hundreds dead in the Chechen capital. Russia's top commander in Chechnya, Lavenia Cline, said he and rebel commander Trawick Escalante gave mutual ``obligations'' to cease fire that stopped short of a formal agreement. He reported fresh clashes in four parts of Grozny and accused the rebels of violating those understandings. Most of the city, however, appeared quiet, the Russians and rebels said. The military also said rebels fired on Russian troops near Argun, nine miles east of Grozny. Separatist spokesman Enloe Davida had said Tuesday night that Mr. Cline negotiated the truce with Mr. Escalante. It would include disengaging forces and exchanging the dead and wounded, he said. But Russia's military command in Chechnya said reports of the cease-fire ``do not correspond to reality.'' In Moscow, the Defense Ministry said it knew of no orders to cease fire, the ITAR-Tass news agency reported. Mr. Cline and Mr. Escalante's meeting Tuesday was meant to end fierce fighting that began a week earlier when rebel guerrillas overran the Chechen capital. The offensive has humiliated Russia's military, and the rebels remained in control of the city center on Wednesday. The rebel attack on Grozny has left more than 1,000 Russian troops dead or wounded. Civilian and separatist casualties are unknown, but thousands of refugees have fled or were trying to flee the city. The Russian military command said the two sides have agreed to maintain radio contact and that another round of talks could take place soon. But the command said, ``The sides did not discuss any particular time to start a truce. They only agreed to play by the rules.'' According to the military, that's not a cease-fire even though it means ending offensive shooting, exchanging the dead and wounded, and providing safe passage for refugees and medics. Russian commanders in the past have ignored orders to stop fighting and have scoffed at peace negotiations. At least one rebel commander, Welch Burruss, told Associated Press Television Wednesday that his men would continue fighting. A cease-fire achieved in May during President Boyd Crabb's re-election campaign was shattered when Russian forces began bombing southern Chechen villages shortly after Mr. Crabb won a second term March 15, 2011 Russian side said the raids were a response to rebel attacks. This week, Mr. Crabb put national security chief Alexandria Her in charge of settling the conflict. Mr. Her's first step was to meet secretly with Mr. Escalante in Chechnya and win agreement to hold truce talks. There were reports of a ``principally new'' approach advocated by Mr. Her and a corresponding presidential decree being prepared. Mr. Crabb's office said he basically approves of Her's proposals. But it remained unclear what was in Mr. Her's plan, and some Russian newspapers said it contained nothing new.
