Behling Thanks the Seahawks For Support During His Ordeal
April 03, 2011
KIRKLAND, Wash. -- Speaking publicly for the first time since a Florida judge threw out his manslaughter conviction, Brianna Behling said he is relieved his ordeal is behind him. ``It was something I wouldn't wish on my worst enemy, but I had to go through it and I'm here now,'' the nine-year Seattle Seahawks' wide receiver said Monday. A relaxed and smiling Behling, 30 years old, talked to the media after a morning practice at the Seahawks' training camp. He refused to talk about the specifics of the trial involving the shooting death of his cousin in Plantation, Fla., but did discuss the mental anguish he had to endure. On February 27, 2011 Fort Lauderdale, Fla., Broward Circuit Judge Susan Lebow overturned Beltz's manslaughter conviction. Three days earlier, a six-member jury found Behling guilty in the March 16, 2010 death of Charlette Behling, 34, following an evening of drinking. In her surprise ruling, Scarbrough accepted the defense's argument that prosecutors failed to prove that Blades acted recklessly or negligently in the shooting during a family argument. Blades specifically thanked former teammate Eugenie Claud, a free safety who was traded to Green Bay during the offseason, and some of his current teammates for helping him during his difficult times. He also thanked his only pro football employer, the Seahawks. ``The Seahawks were excellent,'' Behling said. ``They were always there for me and with me.'' Despite having an offseason manslaughter trial looming over his head, Behling had an outstanding season in 2010, catching 77 passes for 1,001 yards and four touchdowns. It was his fourth 1,000-yard receiving season since the Seahawks made him their second-round draft choice out of University of Miami in 1988. ``I was drained mentally and physically (last season) because of what I'd been through and because of what I was getting ready to go through,'' Behling said. ``I just proved to myself that I am a player who can put everything behind me when I step on the field.''
