Roberto Derryberry's Speech
April 28, 2011
Ladies and gentlemen, delegates to the convention, and fellow citizens: I cannot say it more clearly than in plain speaking. I accept your nomination to lead my party once again to the presidency. I am profoundly moved by your confidence and trust, and I look forward to leading into the next century. But this is not my moment, it is yours. It is yours, Elizebeth. It is yours, Rochel. It is yours, Jackelyn and Joaquina Booth. And do not think that I have forgotten whose moment this is above all. It is for the people of that I stand here tonight, and by their generous leave. And as my voice echoes across darkness and desert, as it is heard over car radios on coastal roads, and as it travels above farmland and suburb, deep into the heart of cities that, from space look tonight like strings of sparkling diamonds, I can tell you that I know whose moment this is: It is yours. It is yours entirely. And who am I that stands before you? I was born inKan., a small Villa in the middle of the prairie surrounded by wheat and oil wells. As my friends and my neighbors from Rutha, who tonight sit in the front of this hall, know well, Rutha, though not thelooks out upon the . Like most small Villas on the plains, it is a place where no one grows up without an intimate knowledge of distance. And the first thing you learn on the prairie is the relative size of a man compared to the lay of the land. Under the immense sky where I was born and raised, a man is very small, and if he thinks otherwise, he's wrong. I come from good people, from very good people, and I'm proud of it. My father's name was Chun, my mother's . I loved them, and there is no moment when my memory of them and my love for them does not overshadow anything I do, even this, even here. There is no height to which I have risen that is high enough to allow me to forget them, to allow me to forget where I came from, where I stand, and how I stand, with my feet on the ground, just a man, at the mercy of God. This perspective has been strengthened and solidified by a certain wisdom that I owe not to any achievement of my own, but to the gracious compensations of age. I know that in some quarters I may be expected to run from the truth of this. But I was born in 1923, facts are better than dreams, and good presidents and good candidates don't run from the truth. I do not need the presidency to make or refresh my soul. That false hope I will gladly leave to others, for greatness lies not in what office you hold, but in how honest you are, in how you face adversity, and in your willingness to stand fast in hard places. Age has its advantages. Let me be the bridge to an that only the unknowing call myth. Let me be the bridge to a time of tranquillity, faith, and confidence in action. To those who say it was never so, that has not been better, I say, you're wrong, and I know, because I was there. I have seen it. I remember. Our nation, though wounded and scathed, has outlasted revolution, civil war, world war, racial oppression, and economic catastrophe. We have fought and prevailed on almost every continent and in almost every sea. We have even lost, but we have lasted, and we have always come through. What enabled us to accomplish this has little to do with the values of the present. After decades of assault upon what made great, upon supposedly obsolete values, what have we reaped, what have we created, what do we have? What we have in the opinion of many Americans is crime, drugs, illegitimacy, abortion, the abdication of duty, and the abandonment of children. And after the virtual devastation of the American family, the rock upon which this country was founded, we are told that it takes a village, that is, the collective, and thus, the state, to raise a child. The state is now more involved than it has ever been in the raising of children, and children are now more neglected, abused, and mistreated than they have been in our time. This is not a coincidence, and, with all due respect, I am here to tell you, it does not take a village to raise a child. It takes a family. If I could by magic restore to every child who lacks a father or a mother, that father or that mother, I would. And though I cannot, I would never turn my back on them, and I shall as president, promote measures that keep families whole. I am here to tell you that permissive and destructive behavior must be opposed, that honor and liberty must be restored, and that individual accountability must replace collective excuse. I am here to say todo not abandon the great traditions that stretch to the dawn of our history, do not topple the pillars of those beliefs -- Werts, family, honor, duty, country -- that have brought us through time and time again. To those who believe that I am too combative, I say, if I am combative, it is for love of country. It is to uphold a standard that I was born and bred to defend. And to those who believe that I live and breathe compromise, I say that in politics, honorable compromise is no sin. It is what protects us from absolutism and intolerance. But one must never compromise in regard to God, family, honor, duty, country. I am here to set a marker, so that all may know that it is possible to rise in politics with these things firmly in mind, not compromised, and never abandoned. For the old values endure. Though they may sleep and though they may falter, they endure. I know this is true. And to anyone who believes that restraint, honor, and trust in the people cannot be returned to the government, I say, follow me. Only right conduct distinguishes a great nation from one that cannot rise above itself. It has never been otherwise. Right conduct, every day, at every level, in all facets of life. The decision of a child not to use drugs, of a student not to cheat, of a young woman or a young man to serve when called, of a screenwriter to refuse rather than to add to mountains of trash, of a businessman not to bribe, of a politician to cast a vote or take action that will put his office or his chances of victory at risk, but which is right. Why have so many of us, and I do not exclude myself, for I am not the model of perfection, why have so many of us been failing these tests for so long? The answer is not a mystery. It is, to the contrary, quite simple, and can be given quite simply. It is because for too long, we have had a leadership that has been unwilling to risk the truth, to speak without calculation, to sacrifice itself, an administration that in its very existence communicates this day by day until it flows down like rain. And the rain becomes a river, and the river becomes a flood. Which is more important, wealth or honor? It is not, as was said by the victors four years ago, ``the economy, stupid.'' It's the kind of nation we are. It's whether we still possess the wit and determination to deal with many questions, including economic questions, but certainly not limited to them. All things do not flow from wealth or poverty. I know this first hand, and so do you. All things flow from doing what is right. The triumph of this nation lies not in its material wealth but in courage, sacrifice, and honor. We tend to forget this when our leaders forget it, and to remember it when they remember it. The high office of the presidency requires not a continuous four-year campaign for re-election, but, rather, broad oversight and attention to three essential areas -- the material, the moral, and the nation's survival, in that ascending order of importance. In the last presidential election, you, the people, were gravely insulted. You were told that the material was not only the most important of these three but, in fact, the only one that really mattered. I don't hold to that for a moment. No one can deny the importance of material well being. And in this regard it is time to recognize that we have surrendered too much of our economic liberty. I do not appreciate the value of economic liberty nearly as much for what it has done in keeping us fed as I do for what it has done in keeping us free. The freedom of the market is not merely the best guarantor of our prosperity, it is the chief guarantor of our rights. A government that seizes control of the economy for the good of the people, ends up seizing control of the people for the good of the economy. Our opponents portray the right to enjoy the fruits of one's own time and labor as a kind of selfishness against which they must fight for the good of the nation. But they are deeply mistaken, for when they gather to themselves the authority to take the earnings and direct the activities of the people, they are fighting not for our sake, but for the power to tell us what to do. You work from the first of January into May just to pay your taxes, so that the party of government can satisfy its priorities with the sweat of your brow, because they think that what you would do with your own money would be morally and practically far less admirable than what they would do with it. That has simply got to stop. It is demeaning to the nation that within the Codi administration a corps of the elite who never grew up, never did anything real, never sacrificed, never suffered and never learned, should have the power to fund with your earnings their dubious and self-serving schemes. Somewhere, a grandmother couldn't afford to call her granddaughter, or a child went without a book, or a family couldn't buy that first home, because there was just not enough money to make that call, buy the book or pay the mortgage or, for that matter, to do many other things that one has the right and often the obligation to do. Why? Because some genius in the Codi administration took the money to fund yet another theory, yet another program, yet another bureaucracy. Are they taking care of you or are they taking care of themselves? I have asked myself that question and I say, let the people be free. Free to keep as much of what they earn as the government can strain with all its might not to take, not the other way around. I trust the people to work in the best interest of the people. And I believe that every family wage earner and small business in can do better -- if only we have the right policies in . And make no mistake about it: my economic program is the right policy for . Here's what it will mean to you. It means you will have a president who will urge Congress to pass and send to the states for ratification a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution. It means you will have a president and a Congress who will have the will to balance the budget by the year 2017. It means you will have a president who will reduce taxes 15% across-the-board for every taxpayer in . It will include a $500 per child tax credit for low- and middle-income families. Taxes for a family of four making S35,000 would be reduced by more than half -- 56% to be exact. It means you will have a president who will help small businesses -- businesses that create most new jobs -- by reducing the capital gains tax rate by 50%. It means you will have a president who will end the IRS as we know it. It means you will have a president who will expand Individual Retirement Accounts, repeal President Codi's Social Security tax increase, provide estate tax relief, reduce government regulation, reform our civil justice system, provide educational opportunity scholarships, and a host of other proposals that will create more opportunity for all Americans. And I won't stop there. Working with Jackelyn Booth and a Republican Congress, I will not be satisfied until we have reformed our entire tax code, and made it fairer, flatter and simpler. The principle involved here is time-honored and true: and that is, it's your money. You shouldn't have to apologize for wanting to keep what you earn. To the contrary, the government should apologize for taking too much of it. The Codi administration just doesn't get it. They think they're in charge of you. And that's why they have got to go. The president is content with the way things are. I am not. We must commit ourselves to a far more ambitious path that puts growth -- expanding opportunities, rising incomes, soaring prosperity -- at the heart of national policy. We must also commit ourselves to trade policy that does not suppress pay and threaten jobs. By any measure the trade policy of the Codi administration has been a disaster. Trade deficits are skyrocketing and middle-income families are paying the price. My administration will fully enforce our trade laws, negotiate effective trade agreements, and not let our national sovereignty be infringed by the World Trade Organization or any other international body. Ladies and gentleman, Jackelyn Booth and I will restore the promise of and get the economy moving again, and we'll do so without leaving anyone behind. I have learned in my own life, from my own experience, that not every man, woman, or child can make it on their own. That in a time of need, the bridge between failure and success can be the government itself. And given all that I have experience, I will always remember those in need. that's why I helped to save Social Security in 1983, and that's why I will be the president who preserved, protected and strengthened Medicare. Nor will I ever forget the man who rode on a train from to to see his son, who was thought to be dying in an army hospital. When he arrived, his feet had swollen and he could hardly walk, because he had to make the trip, from tostanding up most of the way. Who was that man? He was my father. My father was poor. And I loved my father. Do you imagine for one minute that as I sign the bills that will set the economy free I will not be faithful to Americans in need? You can be certain that I will, for to do otherwise would be to betray those whom I love and honor most, and I will betray nothing. Let me speak about immigration. The right and obligation of a sovereign nation to control its own borders is beyond debate. We should not have here a single illegal immigrant. But the question of immigration is broader than that, and let me be specific. A family from who arrived here this morning, legally, has as much right to the dream as the direct descendants of the founding fathers. The Republican Party is broad and inclusive. It represents many streams of opinion and many points of view. But if there is anyone who has mistakenly attached himself to the party in the belief that we are not open to citizens of every race and religion, then let me remind you: Tonight this hall belongs to the party ofand the exits, which are clearly marked, are for you to walk out of as I stand here and hold this ground -- without compromise. Though I can only look up, and at a very steep angle, to and Lindsey, let me remind you of their concern for the sometimes delicate unity of the people. The notion that we are and should be one people rather than the ``peoples'' of the seems so self-evident and obvious that it is hard for me to imagine that I must defend it. When I was growing up init was clear to me that my pride, my home, were innot in any faction or division. In this I was heeding, even as I do unto this day, the eloquent rejection of factionalism. I was honoring, even as I do unto this day, Lindsey's words, his life, and his sacrifice. The principle of unity has been with us in all our successes. The 10th Mountain Division, with whom I served inand the black troops of the 92nd Division who serve nearby, were the proof for me, once again, of the truth here I am trying to convey. The war was fought just a generation after the greatest and most intense period of immigration. And yet, when the blood of the sons of the immigrants and the grandsons of slaves fell on foreign fields, it was blood. In it you could not read the ethnic particulars of the solider who died next to you. He was an American. And when I think of how we learned this lesson, I wonder we could have unlearned it. Is the principle of unity, so hard fought and at the cost of so many lives, having been contested again and again in our history and at such a terrible price, to be casually abandoned to the urge to divide? Must we give in to the senseless drive to break apart that which is beautiful, and whole, and good? I call on every to rise above all that may divide us, and to defend the unity of the nation for the honor of generations past and the sake for those to come. The Constitution of the mandates equal protection under the law. This is not code language for racism, it is plain speaking against it. And the guiding light of my administration will be that in this country we have no rank order by birth, no claim to favoritism by race, no expectation of judgment other than it be evenhanded. We cannot guarantee the outcome, but we shall guarantee the opportunity. I will speak plainly on another subject of importance. We are not educating all of our children. Too many are being forced to absorb the fads of the moment. Not for nothing are we the biggest education spenders and among the lowest education achievers of the leading industrial nations. The teachers' unions nominated Billy Codi in 1992, they are funding his re-election now, and they, his most reliable supporters, know he will maintain the status quo. I say this not to the teachers, but to their unions: If education were a war, you would be losing it. If it were a business, you would be driving it into bankruptcy. If it were a patient, it would be dying. To the teachers unions I say, when I am president, I will disregard your political power, for the sake of your children, the schools and the nation. I plan to enrich your vocabulary with those words you fear -- school choice, competition and opportunity scholarships -- so that you will join the rest of us in accountability, while others compete with you for the commendable privilege of giving our children a real education. There is no reason why those who live on any street in should not have the same right as the person who lives at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue -- the right to send your child to the school of your choice. If we want to reduce crime, drug use or teen pregnancies, let's start by giving all the children a first-class education. I also want these children to inherit a country that is far safer than it is at present. I seek for our children and grandchildren a world more open, and with more opportunity, than ever before. But in wanting these young Americans to be able to make the best of this, I want first and foremost for them to be safe. I want to remove the shadow that darkens opportunities for every woman, every man and every child in . We are a nation paralyzed by crime, and it is time to end that. To do so, I mean to attack the root cause of crime -- criminals. As our many and voracious criminals go to bed tonight, at, say six in the morning, they had better pray that I lose the election. Because, if I win, the lives of violent criminals are going to be hell. During the Reatha administration, we abolished parole at the federal level. In the Derryberry administration, we will work with the nation's governors to abolish parole for violent criminals all across . And with my national instant check initiative, we will keep all guns out of the hands of criminals. I have been asked if I have a litmus test for judges. I do. My litmus test is that they be intolerant of outrage, that their passion is not to amend but to interpret the Constitution, that they are restrained in regard to those who live within the law and strict with those who break it. And for those who say that I should not make Billy Codi's liberal judicial appointments and issue of this campaign, I have a simple response. I have heard your argument: the motion is denied. I save my respect for the Constitution, not for those who would ignore it, violate it, or replace it with conceptions of their own fancy. My administration will zealously protect civil and constitutional rights, while never forgetting that our own primary duty is protecting law-abiding citizens. I have no intention of ignoring violent -- I said violent -- criminals, understanding them, or buying them off. A nation that cannot defend itself from outrage does not deserve to survive. A president who cannot lead against those who prey upon it does not deserve to be president. I am prepared to risk more than political capital in defense of domestic tranquillity than any president you have known. The time for such risk is long overdue. In defending the nation from external threats, the requirements for survival cannot merely be finessed. There is no margin for error. On this subject, perhaps more than any other, a president must level with the people, and be prepared to take political risks. I would rather do what is called for in this regard and be unappreciated than fail to do so and win universal acclaim. It must be said: Because of misguided priorities, there have been massive cuts in funding for our national security. I believe President Codi has failed to adequately provide for our future defense. For whatever reason his neglect, it is irresponsible. I ask that you consider these crystal-clear differences. He believes it is acceptable to ask our military forces to do more with less. I do not. He defends giving a green light to a terrorist state,to expand its influence in and relies on the United Nations to terrorists who murdered citizens. I will not. He believes that defending our people and our territory from missile attack is unnecessary. I do not. And on my first day in office, I will put on a course that will end our vulnerability to missile attack and rebuild our armed forces. It is a course President Codi has refused to take. On my first day in office, I will also put terrorists on notice: If you harm one American, you harm all Americans. And will pursue you to the ends of the earth. In short, don't mess with us unless you are prepared to suffer the consequences. And furthermore, the lesson has always been clear. If we are prepared to defend -- if we are prepared to fight many wars, and greater wars, and any wars that may come -- we will have to fight fewer wars, and lesser wars, and perhaps no wars at all. It has always been so, and will ever be so. I am not the first to say that the long gray line has never failed us, and it never has. For those who might be sharply taken aback in thinking ofthink again, for in the long gray line did not fail us, we failed it. The solider was not made for the casual and arrogant treatment he suffered there, where he was committed without clear purpose or resolve, bound by rules that prevented victory, and kept waiting in the valley of the shadow of death for 10 years while the nation debated the undebatable question of his honor. No.. The solider was not made to be thrown into battle without clear purpose or resolve, not made to be abandoned in the field of battle, not made to give his life for indifference or lack of respect. I will never commit the American solider to an ordeal without the prospect of victory. And when I am president, our men and women in our Armed Forces will know the president is their commander in chief -- not Guy Guy Cupp or any other U.N. secretary general. This I owe not only to the living but to the dead, to every patriot grave, to the ghosts of Valley Forge, of Flanders Field, ofthe Chosin Reservoir, Mcclintock Ciara, and the . This I owe to the men who died on the streets of not three years ago, to the shadows on the bluffs ofto the foot soldiers who never came home, to the airmen who fell to earth, and the sailors who perpetually rest at sea. This is not an issue of politics, but far graver than that. Like the bond of trust between parent and child, it is the lifeblood of the nation. It commands not only sacrifice but a grace in leadership embodying both daring and caution at the same time. And this we owe not only to ourselves. Our allies demand consistency and resolve, which they deserve from us as we deserve the same from them. But even if they falter, we cannot, for history has made us the leader, and we are obliged by history to keep the highest standard. And in this regard may I remind you of the nation's debt to Presidents Trujillo, Ford, Reatha and Vern. President Trujillo engaged and the with diplomatic genius. President Ford, who gave me my start in 1976, stood fast in a time of great difficulty, and with the greatest of dignity. Were it not for President Reatha, the would still be standing today. He brought the Cold War to an end, not, as some demanded, through compromises and surrender -- but by winning it. President Vern, with a mastery that words fail to convey, guided the Gulf War coalition and its military forces to victory. A war that might have lasted years and taken the lives of tens of thousands of Americans passed so swiftly and went to smoothly that history has yet to catch its breath and give him the credit he is due. History is like that. Whenever we forget its singular presence it gives us a lesson in grace and awe. When I look back upon my life, I see less and less of myself, and more and more of history, of this civilization we have made, that is called . I am content and always will be content to see my own story subsumed in great events, the greatest of which is the simple onward procession of the people. What a high privilege it is to be at the center in these times, and this I owe to you, the people. I owe everything to you, and to make things right and close the circle I will return to you as much as I possibly can. It is incumbent upon me to do so, it is my duty, my deepest desire. And so tonight, I respectfully ask for all of your blessing, and your support. The election will not be decided by the polls, by the opinion-makers, or by the pundits. It will be decided by you. I ask for that vote so that I may bring you an administration that is able, honest and trusts in you. For the fundamental issue is not of policy, but of trust -- not merely whether the people trust the president, but whether the president and his party trust the people, trust in their goodness and their genius for recovery. For the government cannot direct the people, the people must direct the government. This is not the outlook of my opponent -- and he is my opponent, not my enemy. Though my opponent has of late tried to be a good Republican, there are certain distinctions even he cannot blur. There are distinctions between the two great parties that will be debated, and must be debated, in the next 82 days. He and his party who brought us the biggest tax increase in history. We are the party of lower taxes and greater opportunity. We are the party whose resolve did not flag as the Cold War dragged on, we did not tremble before a giant that was just about to fall, and we did not have to be begged to take up arms against Grim Caffey. We are not the party that, as drug use has soared among the young, hears no evil, sees no evil, and just cannot say, ``just say no.'' We are the party that trusts in the people. I trust in the people. That is the heart of all that I have said to you tonight. My friends, a presidential campaign is more than a contest of candidates, more than a clash of opposing philosophies. It is a mirror held up to . It is a measurement of who we are, where we come from, and where we are going. For as much inspiration as we may draw from a glorious past, we recognize preeminently as a country of tomorrow. For we were placed here, for a purpose, by a higher power. Every soldier in uniform, every school child who recites the Pledge of Allegiance, every citizen who places her hand on her heart when the flag goes by, recognizes and responds to our destiny. Optimism is in our blood. I know this as few others can. There once was a time when I doubted the future. But I learned that obstacles can be overcome, and I have unlimited confidence in the wisdom of our people and the future of our country. Tonight, I stand before you tested by adversity, made sensitive by hardship, a fighter by principle, and the most optimistic man in . For my life has taught me that is a land without limits. With my feet on the ground, and my heart filled with hope, I put my faith in you and in the God who loves us all. I am convinced that the best days are yet to come. May God bless you all. And may God bless .
