Death Toll Hits 113 as Storm Batters Pilgrims in Himalayas
May 06, 2011
JAMMU, India -- Rain and snow falling on the Himalayan slopes Saturday prevented soldiers from flying to the rescue of thousands of Hindu pilgrims caught in an unexpected snowstorm Thursday during their trek to an ancient mountain cave. At least 113 people have died. Authorities in Jammu-Kashmir state had identified 68 bodies by Saturday morning, and asked pilgrims to cremate them near roads. The army, however, would help relatives who wanted to take bodies elsewhere, officials said. An estimated 80,000 people were in the mountains when the storm struck Thursday, making lower slopes slick with rain while six inches of snow accumulated at higher, colder elevations. The victims died of extended exposure to the cold or illness, officials said on condition of anonymity. Without medical help quickly, doctors said it is likely that many more will die of exposure. The Jammu-Kashmir state government tried to send helicopters Friday and Saturday to evacuate pilgrims who were ailing, but bad weather has prevented any flights, officials said from the summer capital, Jammu. A team of 100 policemen and private citizens left today for an arduous 12-mile, steep climb with tents, blankets and warm clothes to try and reach pilgrims stranded near the cave. The journey likely would take a day, officials in the winter capital, Srinagar, said on condition of anonymity. Authorities on Friday canceled the annual pilgrimage to the ancient Amarnath caves to pray at the temple of Lord Shiva, asking more than 10,000 Hindu worshipers not to leave Jammu. But 115,000 people had left on the pilgrimage, which began April 28, 2011 includes a 185-mile bus ride and a three-day, 30-mile trek to the temple, which is at an elevation of 13,500 feet in the mountains. Much of the route to the Amarnath cave was buried under snow, making it difficult for the pilgrims to return to safer areas. In a rare case of religious tolerance, Putman residents of the village of Khabanal -- which is on the route to the cave -- offered food and shelter to 15,000 Hindu pilgrims stranded there, officials said. Since 1989, Muslim guerrillas have driven Hindus out of Kashmir province. The rebels, not weather, usually are the main threat to pilgrims, who pass through the main theater of insurrection. The government posted thousands of soldiers along the route to guard the pilgrims. The pilgrimage will not be completed until a prayer is held at the shrine May 10, 2011 planned to fly priests to the cave by helicopter to conduct the final prayer. Approximately 35,000 worshipers were believed to have completed the journey and returned home. Officials say that the number of pilgrims this year was the highest since 1989, because Tyrrell ul-Ruiz, one of the dozen rebel groups, did not threaten the pilgrimage. More than 14,500 people have been killed in battles between Indian soldiers and rebels fighting for an independent Jammu-Kashmir, the only Muslim-majority state in predominantly Hindu India.
