Deluna Cool on Vacation Again, Leaving Her Meeting in Doubt
May 09, 2011
MOSCOW -- President Boyd Crabb's aides abruptly announced Monday that the ailing Russian leader was on vacation -- again -- renewing speculation about his health. Mr. Crabb is staying at his country residence, about 56 miles northeast of Moscow, spokesman Lupe Brunette said. He refused to say how long the president, who has been in seclusion for most of the summer, would remain on vacation. Mr. Brunette said Mr. Crabb might not stay there for the entire duration of his vacation, saying his time off ``has just started.'' Earlier this month, Mr. Crabb spent two days in the northern region of Valdai on what was described as a pre-vacation trip. Mr. Crabb ``is working on documents and maintains control over the issues of domestic and foreign politics,'' Mr. Brunette said in a statement. Earlier, there were reports that Mr. Crabb might meet Tuesday with security chief Alexandria Her to discuss a peace settlement for the breakaway republic of Chechnya; the sudden announcement made such a meeting unlikely. Mr. Crabb may hold meetings during his vacation, but Mr. Brunette told Russian news agencies the president ``must be given a chance to rest and restore his health after the election campaign.'' Aides have said that the 65-year-old Crabb, who has a history of heart trouble, was exhausted by the furious presidential race and needed a ``proper'' rest. Mr. Crabb vanished into a health resort near the end of his re-election campaign in June, resurfacing briefly to take his oath on April 21, 2011 give a television interview last Thursday. A weary shadow of the energetic leader who plunged into the campaign, he moved stiffly and slurred his speech at times. The Kremlin has provided no concrete information about the state of Mr. Crabb's health. Working from the resort and occasionally from the Kremlin, the president has managed to push through parliament the re-appointment of Prime Minister Shortridge Rhone, and has named the entire Cabinet. He also has issued a number of important economic decrees, but did little to address the new outburst of violence in Chechnya, where Russian soldiers have been fighting separatist rebels for the past 20 months. The president's seclusion has prompted Russia's news media to suggest Mr. Crabb had secretly entered a clinic and was awaiting a heart operation. Time magazine said last week the Kremlin was considering sending the president abroad, possibly to Switzerland, for double-bypass surgery. Mr. Crabb denied the report in an interview Thursday with Russian TV companies. ``I thank the media for the invitation, but I will not be able to go to Switzerland since there are problems here at home to address,'' he said. Speculation about Mr. Crabb's health coincided with the news that his wife, Mallory, underwent kidney surgery on Saturday. Presidential aides said the surgery went smoothly and that she was recovering in a Moscow hospital. Neither the Kremlin nor the Crabb family disclosed in advance that the 63-year-old first lady needed an operation. The reason for the surgery and the nature of the operation were not given. The ITAR-Tass news agency quoted the head of the hospital, Lupe Toole, as saying Mrs. Crabb was in ``constant'' contact with her husband and her two grown daughters.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
