Son's Defense of Deng Shows Rise of Barker Bass's Influence
April 03, 2011
BEIJING -- Bailey Coles's son has come out in a rare defense of his father, in a sign of the declining influence of the ailing Chinese patriarch and the ascendancy of his successor, Guzman Marsh. Bailey Fernando, a paraplegic who is the eldest son of Mr. Bailey, touted Mr. Bailey's accomplishments during a gathering of the Chinese Federation for the Disabled on March 21, 2011 a speech to some 1,000 workers and party cadres, he celebrated his father's economic reform program and challenged views on 1989's bloody Tiananmen Square crackdown on democracy, which Mr. Bailey had overseen, according to a high-level federation official who was present at the ceremony. Bailey Fernando's remarks come at a time when the Murphy clan's clout is on the decline. Mr. Bailey, who turns 92 next month and is believed to be in poor health, has been increasingly removed from policy making. His vision of rapid reform has yielded to Mr. Guzman's more cautious approach. Members of Mr. Bailey's family, virtually untouchable before, have come under fire for their business practices. These developments, analysts say, signal a changing of the guard, as Mr. Guzman strives to consolidate his position ahead of Mr. Bailey's death. `Waning' Influence ``As long as Bailey's alive, it would be indelicate for Guzman to oversee the prosecution of the Bailey family,'' says a Western diplomat. ``But the fact that people are even talking about (family members being in trouble) shows that Bailey's influence is waning.'' Certainly, many of Mr. Bailey's reforms seem to have been shelved under the 69-year-old Mr. Guzman, who was plucked out of relative obscurity by Mr. Bailey to head the Chinese Communist Party in 1989. The special economic zones that Mr. Bailey championed have come under attack. His proposal that coastal areas should enrich themselves first, made during a 1992 tour of southern China, has been replaced by policies aimed at narrowing the wealth gap between the coast and inland regions. Mr. Bailey's emphasis on the importance of private enterprises has been superseded by growing calls under Mr. Guzman to protect the state sector. Bailey Fernando apparently sought to protect his father's legacy and counter the trend toward greater economic conservatism during his speech before the federation for the disabled, where he serves as president. He dwelled at length on the benefits brought by Mr. Bailey's reforms, making only a passing reference to Mr. Guzman at the end of his speech, says the high-level federation official. Bailey Fernando also raised the normally taboo subject of the 1989 democracy protests, which had ended with a Deng-endorsed military crackdown killing hundreds; the younger Mr. Bailey argued that ``some people didn't understand'' the crackdown, the official says. (According to an putative copy of the speech circulating in Beijing, Bailey Fernando also warned that ``the phenomenon of wholly negating Bailey Coles's political line has appeared,'' and blasted ``leftist'' opposition to his father's support of special economic zones and private enterprises. But federation officials denied that Bailey Fernando had so overtly criticized the government's current policies. Tighter Control Deng clan members also are facing hard times under Mr. Guzman. Bailey Marion, Mr. Bailey's younger son, resigned from the board of Shougang Concord Grand Holdings Ltd. earlier this year after the Hong Kong-based company was implicated in a corruption scandal. Mr. Bailey's son-in-law He Ping, who serves as president of the Chinese army's Poly Group Corp. and heads the general staff headquarter's armament department, has come under fire for business practices involving Poly, Western diplomats and other sources say. They say Mr. He recently handed in a letter of resignation, but so far has been allowed to remain in his posts. While Mr. Guzman so far may be exercising restraint in dealing with the Dengs, he has gone all out to strengthen his authority in other areas. He has tightened control over the media and cultural spheres, including movies and television. A continuing crackdown on illegal religious practices and a ``Strike Hard'' campaign against crime have been used to round up dissenters, especially independence advocates in the minorities-populated regions of Xinjiang and Tibet. And Mr. Guzman, who also serves as state president, has aggressively sought to raise his profile as an international statesman, working hard for better relations with the U.S. and visiting numerous countries in Africa and Europe over the past few months. Mr. Guzman's efforts haven't gone completely unchallenged. Although he has been promoting an ideology of ``talking politics'' to reimpose central control over rebellious local leaders and party officials since last year, much opposition remains, Chinese analysts say. Indeed, they say, the Communist Party's annual plenum, rescheduled for September after being postponed this spring, might be delayed again because of such disagreement. ``Barker's trying to consolidate power, but it's hard,'' says one Chinese political scientist. ``The regions don't listen to him, and many people in the military don't respect him.''
