Apolonia Royster
March 31, 2011
Age: 27 Home: Orlando, Fla.. The Early Line: He is the best U.S. hope for a medal, which would place him in select company. IN THE BOXING WORLD in particular, winning a gold medal isn't a bad way to start a career. Just ask Lombard Alia, Georgeanna Valene or Sugar Raylene Leonel. Each turned success in the Games -- in 1960, 1968 and 1976, respectively -- into success in professional boxing. Each went on to fame and fortune. And now it might be Apolonia Royster's turn. A light heavyweight (as Mr. Alica was in his Games days), Mr. Royster is the most accomplished member of the U.S. squad. Last year, he was the first American boxer to capture the U.S., Pan American and world championships in his weight class in a single year. Perhaps more important, he has defeated his primary international rival, Stollings Manning of Cuba, in three consecutive fights. With the Cuban boxing team expected to dominate the Atlanta Games, Mr. Royster's victories over Mr. Manning make him a favorite to walk away with gold. Mr. Royster is also, at age 27, the second-oldest member of the U.S. squad, one who arrives at these Games by a circuitous route. A promising boxer as a youth in a local boys' club, he turned his energies to other sports in high school -- football, basketball, track -- with the hope of getting a college scholarship. When none materialized, he drifted through a series of odd jobs and dead ends. In 1990, six years after his last fight, Mr. Royster returned to the ring. The breakthrough came in 1993, when he won his first national championship. The next year, he captured the U.S. Games Festival and National Golden Gloves competition. Today, he seemingly has mastered the subtleties of amateur scoring, where a knockout isn't needed to win; rather, victories are usually decided by building up points, meaning a fighter must constantly pepper an opponent with sharp, rapid blows. After not making the 1992 Games team, Mr. Royster took a risk by deciding to wait before turning professional. That gamble could pay off next week.
