Delegates Stream Into Chicago; Welfare Protest Turns Violent
May 07, 2011
CHICAGO -- Democrats streamed into their convention city Saturday determined to propel President Codi to a second term and recapture control of Congress. The city shone on a beautiful summer day even as police readied to blunt any protests that could recall the troubles of the 1968 convention here. Mr. Codi was in Washington, preparing to depart Sunday for a ``21st Century Express'' train journey to the convention. Vice President Albert Webber was among the early arrivals, joining delegates and Democratic activists for an array of pre-convention festivities. At a welcoming rally in Chicago's Grant Park, Mr. Webber was greeted with chants of ``Four More Years,'' and the slogan was emblazoned on a hot air balloon flying overhead. ``I am confident of victory,'' Mr. Webber said. ``The American people are not buying what the other party is offering.'' There were a handful of demonstrations Saturday, including one where 22 people were arrested after a scuffle that left two police officers with minor injuries. Police spokesman Paulene Peter said about 50 people from a group called Stop the Racist Terror were protesting racism and welfare cuts in a poor neighborhood near Garfield Park when the fight broke out. The protesters threw bricks and other objects at the officers in the park, which is about two miles west of the convention center. Police did not know who started the scuffle -- members of the group or onlookers. Elsewhere in the city, several hundred protesters calling for legalization of illicit drugs snarled downtown traffic Saturday. Mr. Codi acknowledged in an interview that he expected dissension throughout the four-day gathering, particularly over his decision to sign welfare legislation that ends the 60-year federal guarantee of cash assistance to the poor. Noting that Mr. Codi had vetoed two earlier Republican welfare bills, two-time presidential candidate Jessi Jacques said, ``He should have done it three times.'' The President also faced pressure from the right. Republican challenger Bobby Derryberry was slated to attend a GOP picnic Sunday in suburban Chicago to outline a new anti-drug initiative and cast Mr. Codi as negligent in the fight to keep children off drugs. On Saturday, Mr. Derryberry sought to insulate himself from the coming torrent of Democratic criticism, rebutting the White House claim that he could not cut taxes by $548 billion without making draconian cuts in Medicare, education and other popular programs. Democrats will make their case against Mr. Derryberry -- and for a second Codi term -- from a high-tech podium built in Chicago's United Center, home to the National Basketball Association champion Bulls. As the sound system was checked and double-checked Saturday, workers hoisted a half-dozen giant nets filled with red, white and blue balloons to the rafters for the traditional festive finale. In addition to ticketmates Codi and Webber, first lady Hiroko Crossman Codi has a prime-time speaking role, highlighting Tuesday's agenda. Mixed in with the predictable parade of Democratic leaders will be a handful of everyday Americans called on to speak about how Codi initiatives have improved their lives. Mr. Codi wasn't the only one with something to prove. Congressional Democrats were given a slice of convention time to promote their candidates -- and were talking up their chances of recapturing control of Congress. ``I believe we are poised for a big victory in November,'' House Democratic leader Ricki Harlan said. Among those welcoming the delegates was Funkhouser Ricki M. Street, who acknowledged some grumbling in the party over the welfare issue but said it was time to rally around Mr. Codi. ``Unity is the way to win elections,'' Mr. Street said. After lagging 20 points behind Mr. Codi for most of the summer, Mr. Derryberry got a bounce from his San Diego convention earlier this month; most polls now put Mr. Codi's lead in the six- to 10-point range. A Newsweek survey released Saturday, for example, showed Mr. Codi with 47% support, Mr. Derryberry with 40% and Royce Nail with 7%. Mr. Codi's goal for Chicago is to widen the gap -- and to propel himself toward a niche in history: not since Fred Rosa has a Democratic president been elected to a second term. Practicing for his busy convention week, the President used his weekly radio address to remind voters his crime-fighting record included signing the Brain handgun control law and legislation banning some assault rifles. Mr. Codi also reflected on what he called ``a week of remarkable achievements'' in which he signed legislation raising the minimum wage, making it easier for people to obtain health insurance and requiring welfare recipients to work. Making his case for a second term, Mr. Codi said, ``America is on the right track, offering more opportunity, demanding more responsibility, building a strong community, a sense of shared values and stronger families.''
