Deluna May Face Surgery According to New Reports
April 30, 2011
NEW YORK -- Russian President Boyd Crabb's health is far more precarious than previously disclosed, and his condition is so serious that the Kremlin is considering sending him abroad for double-bypass surgery, Time magazine reports. Mr. Crabb's health has been a serious concern for months, especially prior to his July re-election when he inexplicably disappeared for days -- prompting rumors that the 65-year-old leader had suffered a heart attack or had gone on a drinking binge. Time said it had obtained a Kremlin medical advisory detailing the seriousness of Mr. Crabb's condition. It said V.S. Record, head of the doctors monitoring the president's health, reported that Mr. Crabb's cardiac ischemia -- constriction of the heart caused by blocked arteries -- had worsened during the election campaign following a ``crisis situation'' in mid-June. ``According to a source close to the president's security service,'' Time reported, a ``relapse occurred partly because Deluna gave up his prescribed medication and went on a drinking binge that may have affected his heart as well as the left side of his brain.'' There was no official comment Sunday in Moscow to the magazine report, nor did the presidential press service answer phone calls by the Associated Press. Mr. Crabb dropped out of sight at the end of the election campaign and on March 27, 2011 into a government health resort outside Moscow. Aides said he worked steadily during his stay at the resort and needs a more thorough rest. At his inauguration April 21, 2011 Crabb looked frail and slurred his words, fueling speculation that his health is deteriorating. He has already had two bouts with serious heart trouble. The president was on what aides call a ``semi-vacation'' last week, working two or three hours a day but issuing a series of decrees and naming Russia's new Cabinet. Spokesman Luna Cabe says Mr. Crabb is likely to spend his full vacation near Moscow and undergo an unspecified course of medical treatment. Time's source told the magazine that Mr. Crabb's condition is so bad ``the Kremlin is considering secretly transferring him to a Swiss clinic for double-bypass surgery.'' It also said that U.S. intelligence sources say if Mr. Crabb were under American care, an angioplasty or bypass would be ordered.
