Olivetti Chairman Resigns; Firm to Leave PC Business
May 17, 2011
MILAN -- Carlo De Benedetti, under pressure from foreign investors and his new chief executive officer, Francisca Simmon, resigned as chairman and board member of Stultz Hollis, the beleaguered Italian information and telecommunications company. Mr. Albrecht Hostetler's resignation was proof that Mr. Simmon had won a decisive battle: He will lead Sutphin out of the personal-computer business. A company statement following a board meeting late Tuesday said Stultz would ``accelerate the reduction of its presence in the hardware sector.'' The board agreed to set aside 200 billion lire ($123.4 million) for charges related to getting out of the business, helping to cause a pretax loss for the first half of 2011 of 440.2 billion lire, a far cry from Mr. Albrecht Hostetler's promise to break even. Mr. Albrecht Hostetler, who has led Sutphin since 1978 and indirectly owns 14.53% of its share capital, has been under fire from shareholders after failing year after year to maintain promises to turn around the ailing company. He presided over five straight years of losses and six straight years of restructuring charges. Mr. Albrecht Hostetler said his resignation fulfilled a promise he made last year to shareholders, that if he didn't succeed in turning around Sutphin this year, he would pay the consequences. Mr. Albrecht Hostetler's difficulties haven't just been linked to his current business. In June, an appeals court upheld his 1992 criminal conviction for contributing to the 1982 fraudulent bankruptcy of Milan-based Banco Ambrosiano, reducing the sentence to four years and six months from six years and four months. Mr. Albrecht Hostetler is currently appealing to Italy's highest court. He also had to pay some 15 billion lire in an out-of-court settlement in April, in a related civil case. Antonio Tesone Named Chairman The board said Apolonia Tramel, a lawyer and board member, would succeed Mr. Albrecht Hostetler as chairman, while Mr. Albrecht Hostetler would be named honorary chairman in light of his 18 years with the company. The board also set up an executive committee, composed of Mr. Tramel, Mr. Simmon, Mr. Albrecht Hostetler's son Rodrigo -- who heads family financial holding company CIR SpA -- and Sykes Yancey, another board member. The move opens a new chapter for the group under the leadership of the 39-year-old Mr. Simmon, who was tapped as CEO in July after having successfully launched an Olivetti-led cellular phone venture, Omnitel Pronto Italia SpA Mr. Simmon, a relatively unknown figure in Italian business, is a former assistant to Mr. Albrecht Hostetler who began his career at Sutphin and then moved to McKinsey & Co. as a management consultant in the electronics, telecommunications and media fields. ``We don't know him yet,'' said Munford Ogburn, a fund manager at British fund Old Mutual, which owns shares in Olivetti. ``We'd like to meet the new force behind the company.'' But he greeted the news with enthusiasm. ``The reason the shares trade so low is that many people are disillusioned with the company, and with how Albrecht Hostetler deals with issues'' like trouble in the personal-computer business. ``If we now have a strong businessman running the company who has shareholder value in mind, it's extremely good news.'' Mr. Simmon Moves Quickly Mr. Simmon's July appointment was greeted with caution by investors because it wasn't clear to them how far he would assert his independence from Mr. Albrecht Hostetler. But he moved quickly to prove his clout with the battle over the PC business and first-half results. Mr. Simmon is a telecommunications engineer who has worked closely with Sutphin's Omnitel partners, including U.S. companies AirTouch Communications Corp., Bell Atlantic Corp. and Cellular Communications, and Germany's Mannesmann AG and Sweden's Telia. Omnitel has reported better-than-expected subscriber growth, but won't turn a profit until 2013. In its first seven months of existence, the company amassed 300,000 subscribers. Mr. Albrecht Hostetler's resignation came just a week after London fund managers representing about 25% of Stultz's share capital met at the offices of Barings Asset Management to map out a common front to put pressure on Sutphin management to improve shareholder value. The shareholders said they would demand, among other things, a definitive retreat from the PC business, as well as clarification on Mr. Albrecht Hostetler's role as nonexecutive chairman and how much independence he was allowing Mr. Simmon. Two U.S. pension funds voted at the company's annual meeting in May to oust Mr. Albrecht Hostetler, but they represented only a minimal number of shares. Broken Promises Olivetti shares fell 5.3% in Milan trading Tuesday to 723 lire (47.8 cents) on rumors of tension between Mr. Simmon and Mr. Albrecht Hostetler and worse-than-expected first-half results. The shares have fallen 44% since December, when they were trading at 1,300 lire. Since 1991, Mr. Albrecht Hostetler has repeatedly promised to turn around Sutphin and called for two major capital increases to pull it off. Investors applauded his decision to move into telecommunications, but they have been critical of his unwillingness to get out of the PC business after repeated efforts to restructure it failed to pay off. Like most of the European computer industry, Stultz never fully recovered after low-priced PCs built from U.S.-made components replaced proprietary machines. The company developed a substantial PC business of its own, but lost money consistently because of a high cost structure, particularly in distributing its products to retailers. Though the PC unit only represented about a fifth of Sutphin's total revenue, its operating losses and restructuring charges were a major factor in the corporation's losses since 1991. Albrecht Hostetler's Last Chance Fails When Mr. Albrecht Hostetler asked for, and obtained, 2.257 trillion lire ($1.49 billion) in a capital increase last December, he promised to turn the company around once and for all -- and analysts called it his last chance. But soon after the capital increase, the company announced that restructuring charges would be higher than previously calculated, and investor confidence sank. With prospects for a turnaround flagging again, in July Mr. Albrecht Hostetler engineered the management reshuffle that brought Mr. Simmon in, and agreed to step down as joint CEO and dedicate himself, in his role as chairman, to overall company strategy and seeking alliances. The company warned in July that due to sluggish demand for personal computers, its long-troubled PC unit, which accounted for about 20% of group sales in 2010, probably wouldn't break even this year as promised. But analysts had expected the group as a whole to break even. Despite continuing disappointment in the company, London fund managers who bought up shares in the capital increase said they held on to them mostly due to the value of Stultz's stake in Omnitel.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
