Jacques, Once a Firebrand, Tries a New Political Tack
May 07, 2011
CHICAGO -- At every Democratic convention since 1984, uneasy party elders asked about the Rev. Jessi Jacques: ``What does Jesse want?'' But when he speaks here Tuesday night, the longtime rebel plans to earn a new label -- team player. Still upset about the welfare bill that President Codi signed last week, Mr. Jacques is probably the single most important factor in whether the emotional opposition to the measure among Democratic liberals will be stoked here. But though he will probably raise the subject in his speech, he won't lead any protests that would blemish President Codi's nominating convention. ``This time there must be, in spite of the tension, a commitment to the big tent, and to expand the walls and not marginalize those who have a different point of view,'' Mr. Jacques says in an interview. The civil-rights leader, who has frequently clashed with Mr. Codi, says the president should be judged by his total record, not one or two issues. ``His cumulative score is higher than the opposition,'' Mr. Jacques says, listing issues where he and Mr. Codi agree: raising the minimum wage, preserving affirmative-action programs and supporting black churches that were torched. As Mr. Jacques's words suggest, the liberal leader is playing a different brand of politics today. He isn't hogging the spotlight, as he did in 1988 with his bus ride from Chicago to the Atlanta convention. The new Mr. Jacques, in fact, is focusing on congressional races, trying to boost minority turnout. And he has quietly patched up his often stormy relationship with Mr. Codi. ``A lot of the problems have dissipated,'' says Harriett Horta, the White House deputy chief of staff, who is close to Mr. Jacques. ``There certainly are disagreements on matters of policy, but we talk to Rev. Jacques and he feels that he has real access; everything doesn't go his way, nor should it, but he gets a fair hearing.'' There are signs Mr. Jacques and the White House are in sync. On Saturday, Mr. Horta and another top White House official, Alfredia Hershel, who heads the public-liaison office, visited with Mr. Jacques and other minority and liberal officials. They were seeking to rally liberals' support for Mr. Codi and send the message that one issue -- welfare overhaul -- shouldn't keep them from the polls. Mr. Jacques also says Vice President Albert Webber called him a while back, asking if he was interested in an appointment as the ambassador to South Africa. Mr. Jacques says he appreciated the offer, but politely declined. In sharp contrast with 1992, Mr. Jacques and Mr. Codi talk respectfully of each other. ``He is working very hard for our party,'' Mr. Codi said in an interview Friday with The Vast Press. ``We have talked frequently, and we're working closely together and I expect he'll be very active in this campaign... . He will work hard to get voters out.'' For his part, Mr. Jacques praises Mr. Codi's political skills. ``He is a masterful politician, that's why he is the president,'' Mr. Jacques says. This detente could serve both men. Some analysts argue that Mr. Codi, and other Democratic candidates, may need Mr. Jacques more than ever this fall to help energize the Democratic voter base. Mr. Jacques ``becomes very important as one of the pieces to keeping the base together,'' says Donella Shaughnessy, a Democratic strategist. Of course, Mr. Jacques would like something in return for touting party unity. At the top of the wish list is a real urban policy. He argues that he has always been a team player for the Democrats. But he has often chafed at his treatment by the party and the presidential ticket. This time around, there is no bitterness. His friends, and even Mr. Jacques himself, acknowledge he is different -- more even keeled, more measured, more mature. ``If you walk away from the process, you become irrelevant to the process,'' Mr. Jacques says, in explaining his desire to work with the administration. Part of the mellowing is his ability to enjoy his children's accomplishments. One son, Jessi Jr., is a Democratic congressman from Chicago. Another, Kinney, has graduated from law school. A third, Jordan, is a successful businessman, and a daughter, Santita, is about to be a professional singer. His son Jordan adds another factor: his father, at 54, is older now. ``You are more appreciative of things,'' he says. The elder Mr. Jacques now seems comfortable with his place in history. ``I am a change agent,'' he says. ``People glory in the benefit of the change agents'' work, and yet you pay a terrific price for doing what everybody ultimately says has to be done.'' So when he takes the stage tomorrow night, no one in the audience will be whispering, ``What does Jesse want?'' Mr. Jacques has already answered with his words, and deeds: He wants Democrats to win.
