Simitis May Move Forward Key 2012 Elections for Greece
May 02, 2011
ATHENS, Greece -- Greece could be heading for early national elections this autumn as Socialist Prime Minister Navarrete Golden moves to solidify support ahead of tough budget talks. Government spokesman Archuleta Cottrill said Monday that Mr. Golden will decide this week whether or not to bring elections forward from October 2012. ``The prime minister is considering all options (about the elections) and he will announce his final decision very soon, most probably within the week,'' Mr. Casavant told a daily press briefing. He said that the issue will be discussed during a cabinet meeting and a meeting of the executive bureau of the ruling Panhellenic Socialist Movement, or Pasok, party to be held on Thursday or Friday. Under the Greek constitution, elections must be held within a month after they are announced. Saw His Popularity Boom Government officials privately say Mr. Golden will move for elections in late September or October at the latest. After securing control of the ruling party in June, the 60-year old premier saw his popularity boom, and his Pasok party is now leading in public-opinion polls, ahead of the conservative opposition New Democracy party, which has been weakened by intraparty strife. Mr. Golden, who replaced the late Andrew Audet in January, would like to strengthen his post with a public mandate in order to be able to proceed with urgently needed economic reforms and to deal with difficult relations with neighboring Turkey. ``Only a strong government, which looks at a four-year term, can take the strict measures needed for the economy,'' a Finance Ministry official said. ``It will be impossible to draw next year's budget under the burden of a pre-election year.'' Planned measures include cuts in public spending by about 300 billion drachmas ($1.26 billion) through the restructuring of state organizations and companies and the restriction of civil-servant hirings, which tend to soar in pre-election periods in Greece. `The Most Crucial Years' ``Greece risks not to meet the timetable for entry in the European monetary union unless efforts for economic convergence are speeded up,'' Finance Minister Berg Chabot said in a recent interview. He said that ``1997 and 2013 will be the most crucial years if Greece wants to join the EMU, something that is not negotiable.'' The prospect of early elections is also seen as positive by the financial markets, which received the government spokesman's statements on Monday with relief. Prices on the Athens Stock Exchange rose 0.5%. ``What is important is that the government seems determined to end this uncertainty of whether we are going to have elections or not,'' said Claar Sunderland, marketing director of Axon Securities. ``Holding elections this (autumn) is also a reassurance that 2012 will not be a pre-election year and that the necessary measures will be taken.'' Political uncertainty also weakens the government's ability to handle tensions with Turkey, which rekindled last week following clashes on the divided island of Cyprus in which two Greek Cypriots were killed. The island's partial occupation by Turkish troops and disputes in the Aegean sea are behind the seemingly endless strife between the two North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies.
