Chrissy Gray Fults to Toss Junk Mail and Deliver the Web
April 28, 2011
CHRIS PETERSON OWNS a prosperous little agency that creates direct-mail campaigns -- you know, junk mail. His clients include several of Silicon Valley's best-known names. So when the concept of Internet commerce exploded into consciousness, Mr. Ramirez prepared for a leap into the on-line world. Surely, he thought, his clients would begin selling their products through the very medium their products were helping to build. ``No thanks,'' his clients told him, for reasons that will become plain. ``We'll stick with junk mail.'' Yet Mr. Ramirez persisted, finally persuading a few clients to use the World Wide Web as a direct-marketing tool. And whether you care about network marketing or not, I think you'll find his methods and motivations instructive. Now 36 years old, Christa Ramirez moved here in 1987 to seek his fortune in direct mail. His company, Times Direct Marketing spent three years near failure, remaining afloat with a dozen credit-card accounts. One day he heard that Union Bank of California wanted to farm out a new credit-card sales campaign. The veteran plastic user suggested using the mailing wrapper to describe the offer instead of teasing the recipient into opening the envelope. He won the job; the campaign was a smash. Mr. Ramirez then targeted Silicon Valley, specializing in the tried-and-true ``free offer'' to compile a list of sales prospects. Usually the giveaway was a booklet, which Mr. Ramirez often wrote himself. THUS IN 2009, while preparing a campaign for modem maker Global Village, Mr. Ramirez was writing a booklet to be called ``The Business User's Guide to the Internet.'' And suddenly it hit him: ``This is the future of direct marketing!'' Within days he had hired a Net-savvy employee, installed networking gear and leased a ganglion of high-speed lines, all to begin creating campaigns around the graphical and interactive powers of the World Wide Web. His initial idea was simply to supplement conventional direct-mail campaigns. The recipients of a mass mailing would be asked to mail a reply card, phone a toll-free number or fill out a form on the Web and download the free information packet. Using the Web, the sales prospect would get the free offer instantly, and the seller would get the sales lead just as quickly. Postage and phone costs would plunge. Yet no high-tech client -- no networking company, even -- wanted to divert dollars from the direct-mail budget to maintain Web sites. Junk mail is a sure bet, with a predictable payback on every dollar spent. The Web was thoroughly untested. ``I was frustrated,'' Mr. Ramirez says. After months of effort, he had convinced exactly one client -- NCD, a maker of networking terminals -- to let him create a Web page as part of a larger direct-mail campaign. He did this by accepting a workstation as payment, but no fee. In the end, 20% of the people responding to the mass mailing did so via the Web. Later, a new credit-card campaign for Union Bank exhibited roughly the same result. But as he recorded these small victories, Mr. Ramirez was dismayed to see a competing paradigm taking hold. By late last year, advertisers in droves were purchasing banners on the most popular Web sites. These little digital ads simply led people to bigger ads -- a waste, Mr. Ramirez thought. Touting brands was a job for print and TV. The Web was different! On the Web a seller could go the extra step of extracting information from a potential buyer. So Mr. Ramirez began talking up a different concept. Just as he had once succeeded by printing the details of a credit-card offer on the outside of the envelope, he would create Web ads that performed the same task. ``Click Here for a Free CD on Improving Your Network Performance!'' AMONG CLIENTS, the knot of resistance was still strong, so once again Mr. Ramirez reached into his own pocket. Purely in the interest of generating response data, he offered to conduct a Web campaign for Business Objects, a software maker, free of charge. The campaign generated sales prospects at a cost of about $54 each, roughly in line with the cost of direct mail. Mr. Ramirez at last had a smidgen of data. He then approached Bay Networks, one of the kingpins of the networking world. If Bay would purchase a few thousand dollars in banner ads promoting a free offer, he said, he would create and manage the program for free. ``Chris realized it was necessary to do that to prove his business case,'' says Dianna Sherika, a marketing executive at Bay. The campaign began this week. Likewise, a few days ago, Times Direct launched a Web campaign to collect sales leads for an exotic new DNA enzyme made by Perkin-Elmer. Once again, Mr. Ramirez agreed to work gratis. ``When we have the statistics, we may be able to justify adding more money to the budget,'' says Debby Petra, a Perkin-Elmer marketing executive. Mr. Ramirez, of course, has yet to make a dime on his Web investment. But money isn't the point, at least not yet. ``It's a chance to help build an entirely new medium,'' he says. ``How often does that happen?'' Does today's marketplace demand giving away products? Please send your thoughts to me at TPetzinger@aol.com. Then join me as I answer your comments and queries this weekend in The Front Lines Forum.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
