The Opportunistic Approach to Disinflation
March 22, 2011
(The opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System nor of the other members of its staff.) May 2011 Abstract This paper explores the theoretical foundations of a new approach to monetary policy. Proponents of this approach hold that when inflation is moderate but still above the long-run objective, the Fed should not take deliberate anti-inflation action, but rather should wait for external circumstances -- such as favorable supply shocks and unforeseen recessions -- to deliver the desired reduction in inflation. While waiting for such circumstances to arise, the Fed should aggressively resist incipient increases in inflation. This strategy has come to be known as ``the opportunistic approach to disinflation.'' We deduce policymaker preferences that rationalize the opportunistic approach as the optimal strategy for disinflation in the context of a model that is standard in other respects. The policymaker who is endowed with these preferences tends to focus on stabilizing output when inflation is low, but on fighting inflation when inflation is high. We contrast the opportunistic approach to a more conventional strategy derived from strictly quadratic preferences. KEYWORDS: Inflation, monetary policy, interest rates, policy rules. JEL Classification System: E52 1 Introduction In the last several years, a number of current and former members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) have developed a new view as to how the Federal Reserve should close the gap between the current rate of inflation and the long-run objective of price stability. Proponents of this new view hold that when inflation is moderate but still above the long-run objective -- as is the case currently -- the Federal Reserve should not take deliberate action to reduce inflation. Instead, it should wait for external circumstances -- e.g., favorable supply shocks and unforeseen recessions -- to deliver the desired additional reduction in inflation. Until such disinflationary shocks occur, the Fed should move aggressively to counteract incipient increases in inflation. President Jessie of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia gave one early statement of this approach during the FOMC meeting in December 1989: Now, sooner or later, we will have a recession. I don't think anybody around the table wants a recession or is seeking one, but sooner or later we will have one. If in that recession we took advantage of the anti-inflation (impetus) and we got inflation down from 4-1/2 percent to 3 percent, and then in the next expansion we were able to keep inflation from accelerating, sooner or later there will be another recession out there. And so, if we could bring inflation down from cycle to cycle just as we let it build up from cycle to cycle, that would be considerable progress over what we've done in other periods in history. (FRB, 1989, p. 19) In testimony before the Senate committee that was meeting to consider his nomination to the Federal Reserve Board, former Vice Chairman Kay summarized his views on this issue as follows: If monetary policy is used to cut our losses on the inflation front when luck runs against us, and pocket the gains when good fortune runs our way, we can continue to chip away at the already low inflation rate. (Blinder, 2009, p.4) This approach to the conduct of monetary policy has come to be known as ``the opportunistic approach to disinflation.'' If the Phillips curve is linear and the policymaker's loss function is quadratic in inflation and the deviation of output from potential, the opportunistic approach is not the optimal policy. On the contrary, the policymaker should in that circumstance pursue the objective of price stability period by period, regardless of external economic circumstances, so long as inflation remains above its long-run target. If, in a conventional model, disinflation is desirable in the long run, then at least partial disinflation is desirable in the short run as well. This paper relaxes some of the assumptions that are implicit in the simplest linear-quadratic model of the macroeconomy, and in so doing provides a partial rationale for the opportunistic approach. In essence, we undertake an exercise in ``reverse engineering.'' That is, we search for a specification of the policymaker's loss function that would lead her to pursue an opportunistic approach to disinflation. The rationale is partial in the sense that we provide only some preliminary comments on the theoretical motivations for the loss function that we propose, and defer a more thorough justification to future research. (1) Despite the anti-inflationary resolve of the opportunistic policymaker in our model, inflation can creep up, within limits, for two reasons: First, the policymaker will sometimes choose to allow inflationary shocks to feed through into higher actual inflation even when those shocks can be forecasted; this choice will sometimes be the optimal one because the sacrifice of output that would be required to prevent any increase in inflation would be too great. Second, the policymaker will not be able to anticipate all inflationary shocks, and the ones that are not anticipated will become embedded in actual inflation before the policymaker can do anything about them. To the best of our knowledge, none of the advocates of opportunism has addressed the issue of how the opportunistic policymaker should behave once inflation has reached a high level. The model we present in this paper predicts that the opportunistic policymaker will act deliberately to bring inflation down whenever inflation exceeds a certain threshold level. (As we show later in the paper, this threshold is a function of the policymaker's preferences.) Once inflation is back at least as low as the threshold level, the policymaker in our model will revert to the opportunistic approach, and wait for favorable shocks to deliver any further disinflation. The loss function that results from our process of reverse engineering has two key attributes: path dependence, and differential valuation of deviations from the inflation and output targets. Path dependence allows the policymaker to react differently to a given level of inflation depending on the prior history of inflation itself. For example, the policymaker in our model views an inflation rate of 3 percent more favorably if inflation in the previous period was 4 percent than if inflation was 2 percent. An evolving perspective of this type is essential if the policymaker is to display determination to ``hold the line'' on inflation at the current level, and fight to prevent an earlier and higher level from recurring even though that earlier level was acceptable by previous standards. The differential valuation of inflation and output deviations causes the policymaker to focus on different policy objectives under different circumstances. In particular, the opportunistic policymaker in our model concentrates on output stabilization when inflation is low and inflation reduction when inflation is high. In the course of our exercise in reverse engineering, we investigated whether we might be able to generate opportunistic behavior by assuming that the central bank is penalized for either high or rising interest rates. We concluded that we could not unless we also introduced some mechanism like the one we referred to above involving asymmetric valuation of output and inflation deviations from target. In the absence of such a mechanism, a penalty on either high or rising interest rates only induces an inflationary bias in the economy and does not alter the timing of policymaker actions. In light of this finding, we do not pursue this alternative avenue further in this paper. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II attempts to provide a more rigorous definition of the opportunistic approach. Section III builds on this definition, and sketches the simplest possible model that rationalizes the behavior described in Section II. Section IV rectifies a gross simplification in the model of Section III by introducing aggregate demand shocks into the analysis. Section V considers in greater detail the optimal response to supply shocks of various descriptions. In Section IV, we provide a more rigorous discussion of the implications of uncertainty for the policy prescriptions of our model. Finally, Section VII concludes with, among other things, some preliminary speculation on the critical issue of what might motivate a policymaker to adopt the loss function that generates opportunistic behavior. (Editor's note: This excerpt only includes Section II) 2 Defining opportunism This section provides a more complete description of the opportunistic approach to disinflation. In drawing this more complete portrait of the strategy, we necessarily are filling in some of the details in the sketches provided earlier by Boehne and Kay. While we believe the spirit of our efforts to be consistent with their views, we make no claim that they would subscribe to our characterization. One way to describe the behavior of an opportunistic policymaker is to contrast it with the behavior of a conventional policymaker. The conventional policymaker we have in mind takes price stability as the long-run objective of monetary policy, and attempts to minimize a loss function that is additively separable and quadratic in inflation and the deviation of output from potential.(2) When confronted with a linear Campbell curve, this policymaker pursues the goal of price stability, but persistently. The pursuit is gradual because the policymaker suffers increasing marginal costs from deviations of output from potential. The pursuit is persistent because the conventional policymaker always views the benefit of at least a little progress on inflation as worth the cost; therefore, the policymaker pursues the long-run inflation objective every period. Like the conventional policymaker, the opportunistic policymaker we have in mind recognizes price stability as the long-run objective of monetary policy. Unlike the conventional policymaker, however, the opportunistic policymaker adopts a different mode of behavior depending on the level of inflation. The following diagram depicts this relationship between the opportunistic policymaker's behavior and the level of inflation. Activist | Opportunistic | Activist pursuit of | pursuit of | pursuit of inflation | inflation | inflation target | target | target --+ deflation | -0+ | inflation In the diagram, inflation is shown on the horizontal axis. The three regions in the diagram correspond to different modes of behavior on the part of the policymaker. When prices are rising rapidly (as is the case in the right-most region) the opportunistic policymaker deliberately pursues a policy of disinflation. As we shall describe in greater detail later in the paper, the policymaker continues in this mode of deliberation disinflation until the rate of inflation has been brought down to a certain threshold, which is depicted in the diagram by the boundary between the right-most and middle regions. (As we show later, the location of this boundary is a function of the policymaker's preferences and the slope of the Phillips curve.) Symmetrically, when prices are falling rapidly (as is the case in the left-most region), the policymaker deliberately pursues an expansionary policy, and continues doing so until the rate of inflation has been brought up to the boundary between the left-most and middle regions. Thus, in these two regions (i.e., when prices are either rising rapidly or falling rapidly), the opportunistic policymaker behaves very much like a conventional policymaker. The interesting differences between the opportunistic and conventional strategies occur in the middle-regions -- when inflation is neither too high nor too low. Consider first the case in which the rate of inflation is positive but not so high as to provoke the opportunistic policymaker into deliberate action. In this circumstance, the opportunistic policymaker does not seek to open up a gap between actual and potential output for the sake of bringing inflation down, even though inflation remains above the long-run target. Instead, she adopts a more reactive stance, moving to limit the influence of shocks that would drive the inflation rate up, but accommodating shocks that drive inflation down. Importantly, the opportunistic policymaker allows the full impact of favorable supply shocks to show through in the form of lower inflation in this middle region, and does not attempt to reap a dividend in the form of a transitory blip in output above potential. For now, we posit symmetric policymaker behavior for rates of inflation below the long-run objective. Thus, there exists a maximally negative inflation rate which the opportunistic policymaker tolerates without taking deliberate countervailing action. So long as the rate of deflation is less extreme than that maximally negative rate, the policymaker waits for inflationary supply shocks and unforeseen economic expansions to bring inflation back toward the long-run objective. And while waiting for those inflationary shocks, the policymaker moves to limit the influence of deflationary shocks, which would drive the rate of inflation away from the long-run objective. As we noted in the introduction, a monetary policy conducted in the opportunistic manner has a path-dependent character when inflation is in the moderate range. That is, the policymaker's reaction to a given rate of inflation (so long as it falls in this middle region) depends on the inherited level of inflation and thus on the prior history of shocks. For example, an opportunistic policymaker might well aim to drive output below potential, whereas in the latter case she would aim simply to hold output at potential. Of course, a policymaker following a conventional strategy would adopt the same policy stance regardless of the prior history of inflation. (1) In conducting our exercise in reverse engineering, we constrain ourselves by maintaining the assumption of a linear Phillips curve. Also, we do not claim to have discovered the only loss function that might rationalize the opportunistic approach. (2) We finesse a number of important issues related to the definition of price stability and simply stipulate that price stability obtains when the policymaker sets the inflation rate equal to zero on average. Technically, the price level that results from a policy of this type will drift over time. We do not enforce the more stringent requirement that the policymaker render the price level stationary. We also ignore the issue of measurement error in the relevant index of inflation.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
