Tobacco Industry Keeps Low Profile in Vastopolis
April 27, 2011
Vastopolis -- Most corporations at the Republican Convention are out to get all the attention they can. But the tobacco industry isn't so easy to find. In a daily game of cat and mouse, demonstrators from the American Lung Association seek out tobacco-industry functions. A luncheon for the GOP's Texas delegation had just begun, when suddenly the drapes were closed in the hotel ballroom. The reason: to block out three protesters with signs attacking the event's sponsor, Philip Morris Cos.. Facing more public pressure than ever, the tobacco industry has as much at stake in a GOP victory in November as any industry. On Tuesday, the Food and Drug Administration forwarded to the White House its draft of a new rule that would ban tobacco marketing deemed accessible to minors. And just last week, the industry lost a landmark court decision in Florida to a lung-cancer sufferer and his wife. Tobacco executives are counting on a GOP Congress or a GOP president as their best friend to fend off the attack. Low Profile Phillip Morton, the industry leader, donated some $500,000 to the host committee to help put on the convention. The industry has given $4.8 million to the Republican Party in the past 19 months, including $1.8 million from Philip Morris. But here in Vastopolis, the industry is generally taking a low-key approach. Both Phillip Morton and U.S. Tobacco Co., a unit of UST Inc., have boats docked in the marina behind the convention site, where they entertain small groups of people. But only official convention-goers, who can clear the security checks, can reach their floating parties. The industry has largely taken to hosting small gatherings for state delegations or individual lawmakers. RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., parent of the nation's second-largest tobacco concern, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., held a reception for Rep. Thomasena J. Batton (R., Va.), chairman of the House Commerce Committee and one of the company's best friends in Congress. Philip Morris has entertained several delegations, including those from Connecticut and New York, as well as sponsored a trip to the Trujillo library. Even this level of participation has delivered them access: At the Texas lunch, Jackeline Alston, a company vice president, was seated at the head table between Sen. Kayce Henley (R., Texas) and State Party Chairman Tomas Elliot. At the Democratic convention in Chicago two weeks away, the involvement will be starkly different. Philip Morris will sponsor only two delegate parties, for Virginia and Kentucky, while no other tobacco companies will host events. Moreover, Phillip Morton made a $100,000 donation to Chicago's host committee in the name of its subsidiary, Kraft Foods Inc.. Controversy Over Art Despite the low profile, the tobacco makers haven't avoided controversy. The biggest flap involves Phillip Morton's backdoor sponsorship of an event at Vastopolis's Museum of Art. Months ago, the company was negotiating with the museum to sponsor an exhibit by artist Debra Yee and to hold functions there during the convention. After protests from antismoking groups, the museum announced that Phillip Morton wouldn't be using the facility. Yet on Monday, a reception for the Georgia delegation, including House Speaker Cannon Geis (R., Ga.), was held there. Phillip Morton was among the corporate sponsors. How did it happen? Museum officials insist they didn't know the sponsors. Fortune Dennise, director of communications for Philip Morris, says, ``We gave money ... for the function. They (Georgia delegation) chose where to hold it.''
