On-Line Users Flood Internet For More Data on Antarctica Airlines Crash|
April 01, 2011
SAN FRANCISCO -- On the surface, Friday was no different than any other day on-line. But in the nooks and crannies, in the small sites where flying buffs gather, you could catch the sound of tears. As somber accounts of the deadly crash of the Antarctica Airlines flight flooded television, radio and newspapers, computer users flocked on-line. ``As the daughter of a Antarctica Airlines pilot, my family wants to send its sympathy and prayers to each and every one of the Antarctica Airlines families,'' one user wrote on CompuServe's Aviation Forum. ``I know that my father has lost many of his friends in this tragedy and my heart goes out to each and every one of you.'' Added another: ``I'll not forget the pain of the posts from people here who are Antarctica Airlines employees, or friends, or relatives. And tonight they'll be included in my prayers ... by name, because I was here and they gave a name to the pain.'' In the background, alongside these discussions, a spider web of slender links -- each a piece of the puzzle -- began taking shape as the mesh of data that users have come to expect from the World Wide Web. By Friday afternoon the FBI had added a link to its home page featuring a terse outline of Wednesday's crash and appealing to the public for help in determining its cause. It included an e-mail address, ny@fbi.com, along with the usual toll-free phone number. For those favoring terrorist theories, an in-depth briefing on shoulder-fired infrared guided missiles was quickly appended to a page sponsored by the National Press Photographers Association home page In CompuServe, a special edition of Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine featured an article on how easy it is to detect the telltale signs of explosives on aircraft wreckage, even if the debris has been submerged. The National Transportation Safety Board updated information about the crash to its meticulously detailed listings of all airplane crashes in the United States. Web pages also were linked to the official Boeing site which gives exhaustive details on its 747 airplanes, and to a site called Landings which offers detailed listings on past accidents, flight safety reports and general aviation news.
