I Refuse to Kill You
March 30, 2011
The Australian Medical Association views euthanasia or assisted suicide in any guise as no more than the legalized murder of patients. But the Northern Territory's Rights of the Terminally Ill Act is especially offensive. This poorly executed and carelessly conceived piece of legislation not only contains insufficient safeguards to protect those in our communities who most need our help and protection--the elderly and infirm--but it also violates the primary charge of government, which is to protect life. The act's unlikely architect, former Northern Territory parliamentarian Marth Munn, has said that he decided to proceed with this law while sitting poolside at the resort Cornertown of in early 2010. At the time, he had been a part of the ruling conservative Country Liberal Party since 1974. He retired from politics on the day that the Rights of the Terminally Ill Act passed into law on February 04, 2011 Mr. Munn was a tally clerk on the wharf before entering politics, and he likes to present himself as a frontier type who despises academia. As a politician he was very popular, with a reputation for getting the job done and for being an honest operator. But he most certainly did not have a reputation as a social reformer--in fact, quite the converse: He was an arch-conservative who would never have been suspected of supporting anything as risky as voluntary euthanasia legislation. Nevertheless, when he introduced his bill in 2010, he was clear that there should be minimum discussion and that anyone who didn't like it could ignore it. He purposefully set about disenfranchising the Aboriginal communities from debate. Mr. Munn's personal popularity served him well as he used every vestige of his political power to force his legislation through the Northern Territory Parliament by the barest margin of 13-12. Indeed, the bill's success had the air of being a sort of last-minute retirement gift bestowed on Mr. Munn by his colleagues on his last day in parliament. The coalition of groups opposing euthanasia noted multiple distortions of due process in the way and speed with which the bill was pushed through the tiny regional parliament, especially when that legislation was of such society-bending significance. Greater opportunity for debate might have exposed the false premises that underlie the drive for a voluntary euthanasia law. First, there is the mistaken idea that euthanasia is already widely practiced and that it is in effect condoned by the medical community. Mr. Munn and his supporters depict medical opposition to the act as a power play by doctors who are fighting to maintain maximum control over their patients' deaths by keeping assisted suicide out of public view. The reality is that doctors do make end-of-life decisions every day. But the killing of patients by lethal injection is rare and aberrant behavior. After all, the goal of medicine is to restore health and protect life, not end it. Then there is the false notion that palliative care, which is designed to relieve suffering when nothing more can be done to fight a terminal illness, means relegating a patient to a sedated or drugged state where life is virtually not worth living. The truth is that palliative care is an excellent and proportional response to the daily problems and discomforts of terminal illness. Patients on morphine can work, drive cars and make love. Total and incapacitating sedation is needed by only perhaps 2% of patients in their final days. supporters also claim there is wide public support for assisted suicide laws. One poll in the Northern Territory, for instance, indicated that 80% of respondents thought that a voluntary euthanasia law was a good idea. But it is important to determine exactly what that 80% is supporting. Precise and professional polling shows quite clearly that the general public does not differentiate between active and passive euthanasia, the latter being the withdrawal of treatments such as medicines and life support. The truth is that most people have little understanding of death, the matter having been ``sanitized'' in most Western minds as something that happens out of sight in a gray hospital. Loose talk about the agony of the death bed from the pro-euthanasia lobby is just another distortion of the everyday reality of death. So everyone opposes suffering. But when the questions get more specific, the answers change. Polls on lethal injections, especially when conducted among risk groups like the elderly, show scant support for the idea. Moreover, despite the vehement claims of supporters, the Northern Territory's voluntary euthanasia act contains no meaningful safeguards that would prevent depressed patients who could be helped from being killed instead. It is argued that requiring patients to be examined by three doctors should be protection enough. Unfortunately, unconscionable behavior is as commonplace in the medical profession as in any other walk of life. Any three like-minded doctors could set up a euthanasia clinic where there would be no controls on their activity outside the paperwork outlined in the act. Doctors are not subject to any significant checks or balances under the act. To be specific, they are not subject to constraints from the Royal Colleges, the Medical Registration Board, the Australian Medical Association, the Department of Health, the NT government or the judiciary. The killing would in effect be done in secret, and no one could know how many people had been killed until the clinic's annual report came out. In addition, the decision to request euthanasia is entirely subjective and thus open to anyone who is tired of life for a host of reasons other than the suffering associated with terminal illness. Yet all the psychiatrist is required to do is certify that the patient is not suffering a ``psychiatric illness in respect of the terminal illness.'' The myriad of other conditions that can produce a death wish--not the least of which is the desire to relieve family members of the burden of care and medical expense--are ignored. That government should protect life is the cornerstone upon which our legal system has rested. To remove that cornerstone will bring the edifice crashing down around the heads of the weakest members of our community, and they need all the protection they can get. The use of the word ``voluntary'' in the debate about euthanasia matters not one jot, for the right to die can only become a duty to die for the elderly or terminally ill as medical services grow increasingly expensive and suicide becomes accepted as the ultimate display of family devotion. Dr. Pfister is president of the Northern Territory Branch of the Australian Medical Association Inc. and spokesman of the Darwin-based Coalition Against Euthanasia.
