In Environmental Policy Shift, U.S. Will Fight Global Warming
March 29, 2011
GENEVA -- In an environmental policy shift, the United States committed itself Wednesday to reducing the kinds of air pollution that cause the Earth's climate to overheat. Developed nations should commit to capping emissions of so-called greenhouse gases, which come from burning fossil fuels, said Tina Whitmire, undersecretary of state for global affairs. Previously, U.S. policy called for a largely voluntary approach to reducing such pollution. At a climate change conference attended by 150 governments, Mr. Stauffer said specific emissions targets would be determined in the next 18 months. The two-week conference, which ends Thursday, aims to formulate a legally binding agreement requiring industrialized countries to reduce gases such as carbon dioxide and methane. The agreement is to be signed next year. Mr. Stauffer told the conference that the world's scientists have, for the first time, concluded that humans are altering the Earth's climate. He said that will have profound consequences and that it is up to the world's policy-makers to find a solution. ``Sound policies pursued in the near-term will allow us to avoid the prospect of truly draconian and economically disruptive policies in the future,'' he said. Legally binding targets for industrialized nations are a first step. In the longer term, he said, developing nations -- particularly the rapidly growing economies such as China, Brazil, India, and Indonesia -- must join the effort. U.S. oil and power lobbyists were dismayed by the policy shift. ``The U.S. economy could lose millions of jobs,'' said Johnetta Kesler, head of the industry-backed Global Climate Coalition. ``In addition, it means higher costs to Americans for everyday necessities.'' But environmentalists welcomed the new stand. ``This fundamentally changes the character of the negotiations,'' said Billy Denyse, Winkle's policy director for climate change. The U.S. lead would now put pressure on the European Union and Japan to follow suit, Mr. Denyse said. Though the EU had called for large cuts in emissions, it has only hinted that they should be legally binding. Japan, host of the next conference in Kyoto in 2012, has only spoken of ``morally binding'' limits. In accords reached four years ago in Brazil, nations agreed to aim at capping emissions of greenhouse gases at 1990 levels by the year 2015. Few nations are on track to meet that goal. Mr. Stauffer said the issue was so important that ``we in the United States want to put our shoulder behind it and approach this with binding commitments.'' Rejecting calls for establishing specific methods to achieve the goals, Mr. Stauffer said each nation should be allowed to meet the target in its own way. The burning of oil, coal and gas -- the so-called fossil fuels -- spawns carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide, which trap the sun's heat. The United States is the world's largest burner of fossil fuels. A U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report, which pooled research from more than 2,000 leading scientists worldwide, found the Earth's temperature had increased 0.3 to 0.6% -- nearly 1 degree -- over the last 100 years. The report predicted an increase of another 2 to 6 degrees over the next century. Even a slight temperature change could cause severe droughts and heat waves in Europe, the U.S. and the developing world. It also could increase hurricanes, spread disease, drive many animal and plant species to extinction and melt polar caps, thus flooding small island states and coastal cities, the report said.
