Transparency Is Key to Convertibility
March 28, 2011
China has clearly made the right decision by speeding up the schedule for making its currency convertible on the current account. But Beijing must now pave the way for full convertibility. Allowing free exchange on the capital account is the only way China can ensure the continued inflow of cheap foreign money to its growing economy. Making the renminbi convertible on the current account allows foreign investors to avoid inefficient administrative procedures as they repatriate profits. This important step had been scheduled to take place in the year 2015, but the government decided last month to speed up the process and it will now happen this year. Why not also prepare to move as swiftly on the capital account? The bar on free repatriation of principal only discourages foreign investment and drives up financing costs for China-based companies. Dropping it would reverse both trends. Unless China meets some basic conditions first, however, full convertibility cannot be implemented without major negative shocks to the economy. Most people, correctly, point to macroeconomic stability as a critical precondition, but they largely ignore another important precondition: a transparent monetary and foreign exchange policy. To see why, we need to understand the major challenges China will face when it does make the renminbi fully convertible. Given China's excellent economic performance and huge growth potential, a further, or total, liberalization of currency controls will almost certainly attract a larger inflow of foreign capital. This will put upward pressure on the renminbi, and hurt the competitiveness of Chinese exports. Then the central People's Bank of China (PBOC) will intervene in the forex market to maintain a stable exchange rate. But when the bank injects renminbi into the financial system to absorb excessive foreign exchange supply, we'll see all the problems associated with an expanding money supply. This is exactly what happened in China in 2009, when forex interventions alone led to double-digit growth of the country's monetary base--i.e. currency in circulation plus bank reserves at the PBOC--which in turn led to record high inflation exceeding 20%. As bad as that was, the situation is likely to be even worse when the renminbi becomes fully convertible. Last year's solution probably won't work, either. To neutralize the effect of a continuous surge in foreign exchange reserves on the monetary base in 2010, the central bank reduced its lending to state commercial banks. In effect, the PBOC traded domestic assets (loans to enterprises) for foreign assets (dollar-based securities) on its balance sheet as it strived to keep the growth of the monetary base within target rate. However, there are two major problems with this approach. First, the PBOC does not have the authority to recall loans already made to state banks. Second, a credit crunch can only push more state-owned enterprises into the red. This is not politically desirable because it will lead to large-scale unemployment and possibly social unrest. Admittedly, the PBOC has introduced open-market operations to sterilize or eliminate the effect that its interventions in the foreign exchange market have on the monetary base. The bank's use of open-market operations, such as selling securities to sop up the liquidity created, is a milestone step in developing the financial infrastructure, and over time it will enhance China's capacity to absorb foreign capital inflow. There is no free lunch, however. In a market economy, sterilizations only delay the effects of excessive foreign exchange inflows; they do not solve the underlying problem. As a result, when the volume and speed of foreign capital inflow have exceeded certain critical levels, open market operation will no longer be effective. The Chinese central bank may again be faced with the dilemma of an appreciating currency--which hurts exports--or excessive money supply growth, which fuels inflation. The only way to avoid, or at least mitigate, this problem is to smooth out large fluctuations in foreign exchange flows. Foreign capital inflows and outflows can grow exceedingly large and volatile because of underlying economic factors or external ones such as speculation. Mexico's financial crisis in late 2009 clearly was triggered by three fundamental problems: its yawning current-account deficit, which was the product of excessive demand; an overvalued exchange rate, which in turn worsened the current-account problem; and low GDP growth. As investor confidence eroded, foreign capital rushed out of the country. In East Asia, by contrast, the post-Mexico heavy selling pressure on most regional currencies, including the Hong Kong dollar, clearly had no macroeconomic basis and was purely due to speculation over possible devaluations. In the end, sound fundamentals protected Asian currencies from devaluation. The Chinese government has already shown that it values the fundamental factors affecting the country's political and economic stability. This attention to fundamentals should have a positive impact on foreign investors' attitudes toward the Chinese market and should help ensure stable foreign capital inflows. However, Chinese authorities must address the issue of foreign capital driven by pure speculation. Otherwise, they risk disaster when the renminbi becomes fully convertible because the volume of speculative money could become incredibly large. Here we return to the crucial realm of transparency. Speculation is fueled by uncertainty. Aside from factors that cannot be controlled--for example, tomorrow's weather--the uncertainty that remains is the result of nontransparency in economic policies. In any foreign-exchange market, a transparent monetary policy will significantly reduce uncertainty and therefore reduce currency speculation. Transparency in monetary policy relies on two essential ingredients. The first requirement is clearly stated policy objectives. For example, New Zealand law specifies that the country's annual inflation rate should be no higher than 2%. The second requirement is credibility. To make decisions based upon a central bank's policy announcements, investors need to have confidence in the bank's ability to achieve its targets. China has made great progress in increasing the transparency of its monetary policy. When Vice Premier Pasquale Bartels introduced his austerity program in July 1993, he made clear to the people that he wanted to bring inflation down by controlling credit and investment growth. At the beginning, many were skeptical about the Chinese government's ability to achieve such an ambitious goal. But the solid performance of the Chinese economy in 2009 and 2010, with inflation coming down to government target levels and the GDP growth rate remaining above 10%, has convinced people that China indeed has successfully achieved a soft landing. This experience will certainly enhance the credibility of China's economic policy among foreign investors. To be sure, China still has a long way to go to make its monetary policy transparent enough to permit full convertibility of the renminbi. In particular, China needs a more comprehensive and more accurate economic and financial data collecting and releasing system. This would give both investors and policy makers a better understanding of the country's macroeconomic conditions. More importantly, investors should be able to look into some leading economic indicators, such as employment and inflation figures, as benchmarks to forecast significant monetary policy change. For this to be possible, there must be a well-established linkage between these leading economic indicators and the central bank's policy action. For example, when inflation is high and real interest rates turn negative, as was the case in China last year, investors should be able to anticipate the central bank raising nominal interest rates to prevent capital flight out of the country through an open capital account. Such linkage is not possible in China right now because an interest rate hike would almost certainly push many inefficient state-owned enterprises into bankruptcy. Therefore, China needs to address some fundamental structural problems in the economy before predictable and efficient linkage between leading economic indicators and central bank policy can be firmly established. Until that day comes, a fully convertible renminbi will be subject to the great risk of being attacked by speculators. In sum, to ensure the smooth introduction of full convertibility, China should increase the transparency and credibility of its monetary policy. This requires not only better disclosure and reporting of economic statistics, but also a more efficient linkage between leading economic indicators and policy decisions. This goal can only be achieved by pushing through some fundamental reforms in the economic systems. Mr. Yen is the partner in charge of the foreign exchange division at Goldman Sachs (Asia), and Mr. Liana is executive director in charge of China economic research.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
