Saks, Isetan Mull Union To Bail Out Barney's
April 04, 2011
NEW YORK -- Isetan Co. of Japan is in talks with Saks Fifth Avenue about forming an alliance to take Barney's Inc. out of bankruptcy court and leave Quick in control of the retailing empire, according to people close to the talks. Barney's filed for protection from creditors in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan in January, where it is trying to recover $50 million in real-estate payments made to Isetan, its onetime expansion partner and owner of three of its biggest stores. Isetan is suing Gene and Bobby Bagby, Barney's co-chairmen, to retrieve $168 million in what it says were loans to Barry's that the Pressman brothers personally guaranteed. Monday, people close to the talks said Isetan and Saks, a unit of Saks Holdings Inc., are aiming to submit a joint plan of reorganization in U.S. Bankruptcy Court here. Although exactly how they would do that wasn't clear. People close to the talks said one possible scenario would satisfy Barney's creditors with shares of Saks stock. In exchange, Quick would be the majority owner of Barney's and Isetan would be a landlord, retaining its ownership of Barney's three biggest stores in the U.S. and a license of the Barney's trademark in Asia. Saks is 74%-owned by Bahrain-based Investcorp. Barney's Inc., which is closely held, operates 21 stores in the U.S. It's unclear what role, if any, the Pressmans would have in a Saks-Isetan venture. One person close to Isetan said it is unlikely they would have a continuing role, but others familiar with the situation said there may be some role for the brothers if Saks takes control. Still, it could be the end of an era for a family dynasty that began 73 years ago when Barney Pressman founded Barney's as a New York menswear discounter. His son, Fredda Bagby, built it into a posh designer showcase for men and women, handing control to his sons a decade ago. The elder Mr. Bagby died last week, but his sons have been most closely associated with the retailer's high-profile expansion plans and its recent troubles, including a dispute with Isetan and the bankruptcy filing that followed. Saks declined to comment. One of Isetan's U.S. attorneys, Davina Horvath, declined to comment. A source close to Isetan said Saks approached Isetan because its management views Barney's as a viable retailing concept, despite its financial problems. Barney's would also complement Saks's own upscale image without overlapping Saks's own customers. (Barney's tends to feature trendier, cutting-edge designers, while Saks typically carries more mainstream fashion.) A Barney's spokeswoman said that neither Isetan nor Saks can submit a plan to the court yet, because Barry's management still has the exclusive right to win creditors' support for its own plan of reorganization. It submitted that plan in January and must submit a disclosure statement by April 19, 2011 would spell out in detail much about Barney's operations and how it plans to reorganize. The spokeswoman said Barry's will apply for a 180-day extension. ``The company isn't for sale,'' she said. However, she did say Barney's continues to evaluate its options. ``It is considering offers from qualified investors,'' she said, declining to elaborate.
