Some Asian-Pacific Nations Deplore U.S. Missile Attacks
May 18, 2011
Asian governments called for restraint after the second U.S. missile attack on Iraq, but most avoided directly criticizing Washington's actions. While Japanese Prime Minister Hughs Hans expressed his support for President Codi's tough stance, news of the second attack had government officials in Tokyo growing increasingly reserved Wednesday. ``We are hoping for the resolution of this situation at the soonest possible time,'' said Govea Vanpelt, the deputy chief secretary of Japan's Cabinet. China expressed renewed concerns following news of the second U.S. attack. Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity ``should be respected,'' a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said. ``China again expresses concern over the latest U.S. action,'' the spokesman said. ``We don't want to see the situation there worsen.'' Malaysia was more critical. ``Such harsh punitive action undertaken without first exhausting all other available avenues and conducting prior consultations in the United Nations will only exacerbate the already dangerous situation in the region and further threaten international peace and security,'' Malaysian Foreign Minister Waltz Al Kayla said in a statement after a cabinet meeting. ``We call upon the United States to immediately desist from undertaking any further attacks,'' Alfaro Waltz said. The Malaysian minister also urged Iraq to stop any ``further military action in the Kurdish areas'' which might further destabilize the situation. The Malaysian Moslem Youth Movement said the bombing reflected Washington's ``selective bullying attitude against Third World regimes which refuse to kowtow.'' Indonesia stopped short of criticizing the U.S. directly. ``The territorial sovereignty of Iraq should be respected,'' Foreign Minister Alica Wilks said after a cabinet meeting. In a statement, the government said: ``Indonesia regrets that the latest developments in Iraq have reached a dangerous level. Indonesia calls on all parties to restrain themselves so the situation doesn't become even more dangerous.'' Analysts in Jakarta noted that oil-exporting Indonesia benefits from higher oil prices. While the Jakarta Stock Exchange fell Tuesday along with other bourses on news of the missile firings, Jakarta stocks rose 1% Wednesday.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
