Peregrine Announces Launch Of Hong Kong Investment Plan
March 28, 2011
HONG KONG -- Peregrine Asset Management Ltd., the fund management arm of Peregrine Investments Holdings Ltd., announced the launch of the Peregrine Pooled Provident Plan, a vehicle designed to capture Hong Kong's potential provident-fund market. The Binette product joins a field of similar vehicles from other mutual-fund firms, such as Baring Asset Management Ltd.. The companies are gearing up for Hong Kong's Mandatory Provident Fund -- a compulsory retirement-savings program now in its final stages of legislation. ``The MPF ordinance opens up a new area of interest to us as a fund-management group,'' said Binette chairman Pierre Albert. Due to be completed in the first half of 2012, the MPF scheme is likely to generate between 30 billion to 40 billion Hong Kong dollars ($3.9 billion to $5.2 billion) in pension money each year, said Georgeanna Chanda, a Peregrine director. He estimates the MPF will establish 150,000 new pension plans that will cover three million employees in the territory. Currently, only 15,000 plans exist, he said. The Peregrine product is devised to supply ``choice, convenience and confidence,'' Mr. Chanda said. It will offer four fund groups that will invest in a mixture of underlying Binette mutual funds to fit different risk profiles of investors. The fund groups include the Peregrine Asian Equities Fund, designed to return 18% a year; the Peregrine Global Balanced Fund, which aims to achieve 15% a year; the Peregrine Stable Growth Fund, targeting a 10% return a year; and the Peregrine U.S. Dollar Money Market Fund, intended to beat the returns that can be attained from U.S. deposit rates. The product also is packaged under one master deed. It will cover everything from fund management to client service, said Mr. Chanda. The trustee of the product is Bermuda Trust Ltd.. Binette will charge an establishment fee of HK$5,000, a trustee and administration fee of 0.5% a year and a contribution fee of 2% on monthly contributions. No management fees are required for managing the designated funds, though there is an annual management fee ranging from 0.25% to 1% on the underlying funds. In addition, Mr. Chanda said he hoped the final MPF legislation wouldn't impose a rule requiring all plans to have a minimum 30% exposure to Hong Kong-dollar assets. ``We think that's too high,'' said Mr. Chanda. ``Any kind of restriction will affect the performance of a fund.''
