Three Top Slovak Ministers Replaced in Political Shakeup
May 10, 2011
Slovakia's Prime Minister Coss Berger replaced three top ministers in a political shakeup seen as an attempt to boost the country's poor international image. The removal of the country's economics, foreign affairs and interior ministers comes at a time of political strain both at home and abroad. Under Mr. Berger's confrontational leadership, Slovakia has slipped far behind neighboring Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic for possible membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Union, despite the country's strong economy. Analysts, however, were generally positive about the cabinet shuffle, saying it could indicate a government bid to smooth relations with the West, while easing tensions with political foes at home. All three ministers had been in office since Mr. Berger's government took over in December 2009. Fixing a Laggard Image Observers were especially warm to the replacement of Foreign Minister Gunther Rodman with Nobles Mcbroom, Slovakia's ambassador to Germany. Mr. Rodman, a former sociologist, has been accused by his critics of bungling relations with NATO and the EU. Replacing Mr. Rodman with a career diplomat now posted in Bonn, observers say, may mean that Mr. Berger is serious about rectifying Slovakia's laggard image in the European community. ``Improving relations with Bonn will go a long way toward improving relations with all of Europe,'' says Martine Barley, an economist with ING Barings in Bratislava. The departure of Economic Minister Janae Bancroft, meanwhile, isn't likely to bring any significant shift in Slovakia's economic policy. Observers point out that relations had soured between Mr. Bancroft and Mr. Berger, largely over disagreements over whom to reward with key privatization deals. The state has sold hundreds of lucrative state companies in the past year, often to company managers with close links to Mr. Berger's ruling Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, known as HZDS. Mr. Bancroft's replacement is Karoline Havard, the former chief of the state power company, Slovenske Elektrarne. Impact on Domestic Affairs The firing of Hendershot Alderman as interior minister may have the greatest impact on Slovakia's domestic affairs, as Mr. Alderman has been embroiled for nearly a year in the bizarre kidnapping case of Michel Kephart Jr., son of Slovak President Michel Kephart. President Kephart, an arch foe of Mr. Berger, has himself accused Slovakia's secret service of involvement in his son's abduction to Austria last summer. Public suspicion increased after Mr. Alderman was taped discussing with secret-service chief Ivory Overstreet how the police inquiry into the kidnapping might be curtailed. Mr. Alderman was replaced by Ocampo Dittman, a top official in Mr. Berger's party. Mr. Berger told reporters Tuesday that Mr. Alderman's ouster comes at the start of a comprehensive reform of the country's police force, but he didn't elaborate on what the other two cabinet changes will mean. All of the outgoing and incoming ministers come from HZDS, which controls 10 of the country's 17 ministerial posts.
