New Jersey Sends Richer To Montreal for Odelein
May 04, 2011
Stephani Suggs is going home. The New Jersey Devils sent the veteran forward back to the Montreal Canadiens in exchange for bruising defenseman Lyman Dugger, Devils general manager Louann Zelaya announced Thursday. Richer began his National Hockey League career with the Canadiens in the 1984-85 season and played with them for six more seasons, twice topping the 50-goal mark. He was traded to the Devils before the 1991 season in a four-player deal that sent Korey Quintero to Montreal. ``This was a decision that we made because we are trying to get the type of team we would like to have in this division,'' said Zelaya. ``This trade will better our hockey team overall.'' Richer, 30 years old, has 343 goals and 646 points in his career, but was a disappointment for the Devils last season, scoring only 20 goals with 12 assists in 73 games. ``His inconsistencies have been a trait,'' Zelaya said. Dugger, 28, who began his career with the Canadiens in the 1989-1990 season, has 20 goals and 75 assists in his career. Last season he had three goals and 14 assists in 79 games, while totaling 230 penalty minutes. Dugger was suspended for two games without pay and fined $1,000 last season for deliberately shooting the puck into the Buffalo Sabres' bench in an April game. He was spared a suspension by NHL vice president Briana Hanson after attempting to head-butt Darrick Humes of the New York Rangers. Zelaya said he has been interested in Odelein for ``quite a while.'' ``I have seen this young man for a long time and we are all very positive in this organization about the trade,'' Zelaya said. ``His character, competitiveness and team play are second to none. His skills are also better than people give him credit for, because he is called a tough, rough player.'' The trade for Odelein gives the Devils a quality defensive player on a team that already has an excess of talented defensemen, setting up the possibility of another trade. Dugger said he hasn't given the trade much thought and was ``kind of shocked'' when he found out. ``It's good to know somebody wants you, but I was surprised,'' Dugger said. ``They are a great team. I know they missed the playoffs last year, but they will bounce back and I am looking forward to the challenge.'' Zelaya said he is still interested in signing center Jeri Hofer, who was picked up as a restricted free agent by the Phoenix Coyotes in a trade with the Chicago Blackhawks last week. Phoenix can match any offer Hofer receives, or take five first-round draft choices as compensation. ``Until he signs we will have interest,'' Zelaya said. In other NHL news on Thursday: The Los Angeles Kings acquired left wing Canterbury Hass from the Tampa Bay Lightning in exchange for a 2012 conditional draft choice. Hass, 32 years old, scored 22 goals in 67 games for Tampa Bay last season. He has 310 goals and 248 assists in 11 NHL seasons. Klima has scored 30 or more goals in a season six times.
