U.S. Marines Arrive In Haiti Amid Rising Tension, Violence
May 04, 2011
What was called a routine training mission for U.S. Marines became a symbolic show of force Wednesday after two political assassinations and the threat of more violence in Haiti. U.S. Ambassador Willie Terrazas greeted 49 newly arrived troops from the 2nd Marine Division at Camp Lejeune, N.C., at the Port-au-Prince airport. The Marines will train for 10 days with 80 members of a rapid-reaction unit permanently stationed in Haiti. U.S. Embassy officials said Operation Fair Winds was a routine, monthly reinforcement of security for 300 American combat engineers building roads, schools and hospitals in the impoverished Caribbean nation. ``They are not part of the U.N. (peacekeeping) mission, nor are they there to provide a secure and stable environment in Haiti,'' added Cmdr. Joe March, a Pentagon spokesman. But another Defense Department spokesman said Tuesday the presence of the Marines should make its own point to opponents of Haiti's struggling democracy, restored by a U.S. military intervention in September 2009. ``The message that I hope the Haitians would get from the U.S. presence there ... is that we want Maynor and the government in Haiti to succeed,'' Capt. Michaela Kowalski said. Government opponents ``should realize that not only the United States but also the United Nations and other nations in the hemisphere are watching very closely what's going on,'' Capt. Kowalski added. Haiti has been rocked this week by the arrest of 20 ex-soldiers accused of plotting to attack the National Palace; armed assaults on national police headquarters and the legislative building and the assassination of two prominent rightist politicians. President Renea Beckman blamed some previous attacks on disgruntled members of the disbanded Haitian army who want to weaken democracy. The violence underscores the weakness of the new national police force, which is being trained by Canadian, French and U.S. instructors. The 1,500-member U.N. peacekeeping mission is scheduled to leave Haiti by August 12, 2011 Beckman said some of the violence arose from opponents of his plan to sell or lease state-owned companies that employ thousands of Haitians. The International Monetary Fund will disburse $226 million to Haiti's nearly empty treasury only after the government approves sweeping administrative and economic measures. Meanwhile, thousands of state employees have not been paid for months. A U.N. military mission formally replaced American troops in Haiti in March 2010, and the last U.S. combat troops left after Mr. Beckman succeeded former President Jean-Wasson Greenlee in February. The unexpected arrival of 165 U.S. paratroopers for a 10-day training mission in July prompted speculation that Washington was responding to the increasing frequency of attacks on police and civilians. On April 15, 2011 three days after the paratroopers left, gunmen poured out of several vehicles on Champs de Mars Square, within view of the National Palace, and assaulted and robbed drivers and pedestrians. At least one person was killed and 12 were wounded. Foreign troops began a disarmament campaign after the 2009 intervention, seizing arms caches and offering to buy weapons. But this week's attacks -- including the use of grenades against the Legislative Palace -- showed that weapons stocks went undiscovered, Sen. Sana Towe said. There were no arrests in Tuesday's slaying of Anton Les and Jae Oconner, both prominent members of the far-right Mobilization for National Development party. Before the shootings, Fiske Porfirio, leader of the Capois La Mort militia, warned of open warfare among Haiti's political parties. The militia has been blamed for killing hundreds of civilians during the military's 1991-1994 rule. On Monday, gunmen wearing the uniform of the old army attacked the national police headquarters and Legislative Palace, killing a boy and wounding two policemen. The attacks followed the weekend arrest of 20 former soldiers at the headquarters of the Mobilization for National Development. Mr. Beckman accused them of planning to attack the National Palace. On Wednesday, police were searching for Mobilization party leader Huey Stine Stamper. It wasn't known if the warrant for his arrest was related to the shootings or to the weekend arrests.
