Ex-Premier of British Columbia Receives 10-Year Trading Ban
May 16, 2011
Former British Columbia premier Willie Bennie, his brother Ruth and their friend Stoddard Waller, a prominent British Columbia businessman, have been found guilty of insider trading by the British Columbia Securities Commission, concluding the province's longest-running securities case. The three were handed a 10-year ban on trading in securities. They also are forbidden to act as officers or directors of publicly traded British Columbia companies during that time. As a result, Mr. Waller is required to resign as chairman and chief executive of Doman Industries Ltd., the Duncan, British Columbia, lumber concern he founded in 1955. In its 200-page decision, the commission said: ``This is a case about insider trading. Insider trading is often characterized by deceit and greed and sometimes by conspiracy. All these elements were present in this case.'' The commission found that, in 1987, Mr. Waller tipped off the Bennetts concerning a planned 250 million Canadian dollar (US$183 million) takeover offer for Doman by Louisiana-Pacific Corp., a Portland, Ore., forest-industries concern. It also found that on July 17, 2003 Mr. Waller told Ruth Bennie that the deal had fallen through before making the news public. The Bennett brothers dumped their shares later that morning, minutes before the Toronto Stock Exchange halted trading in Doman securities. The Bennetts, who sold their 518,000 Doman shares at C$11.37 a share for proceeds of C$5.9 million, pocketed C$2 million in profits. Doman stock reopened at C$7.75 after the trading halt, before plunging to C$4. The commission's ruling, which requires the Bennetts and Mr. Waller to pay costs of about C$1.5 million, will be appealed, said Mr. Waller's lawyer, Mary Fairfield. In 1989, the British Columbia Supreme Court (the province's lower court), acquitted the Bennetts and Mr. Waller on criminal charges of insider trading. Willie Bennie headed British Columbia's Social Credit government for 11 years between 1975 and 1985. Mr. Waller remains controlling shareholder of Doman Industries, which last year had revenue of C$818 million. The commission's ruling allows him to be reinstated as the company's chairman and chief executive after one year if certain conditions are met, including the establishment of an independent committee to review all trading in Doman shares by employees, officers and directors.
