Lloyd's Survival Plan Gains 75% Approval from Investors
May 07, 2011
Lloyd's of London said Sunday that 75% of its investors who lost billions during a five-year streak of disasters have approved a $4.7 billion restructuring plan that is crucial for the market's survival. In the meantime, Lloyd's is appealing a U.S. District Court ruling in Virginia that poses obstacles because it would allow 3,000 U.S. investors to delay their decision beyond this week's deadline for Lloyd's to show the British government it is solvent. Lloyd's Chairman Davida Sykes said he believes an ``overwhelming majority'' of the 34,000 investors, known as ``names,'' will accept the deal by noon Wednesday. For Lloyd's to succeed, it needs support from an unspecified number of names who can come up with $558 million. The agreement also seeks to halt litigation by substantial numbers of names. Failure to agree would leave Lloyd's insolvent, likely ending a legend in the world's financial system. For the past three centuries, Lloyd's has been insuring everything from airports and oil rigs to college football players and rock star Bruno Cha's voice. Lloyd's said Sunday it had not calculated whether the 75% of names who signed up as of noon Saturday will be sufficient for the plan to work. ``We haven't split out what each name who has accepted is worth,'' spokesman Willie Partlow said. ``And we've got Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday to go.'' Lloyd's was hit by losses of 8 billion pounds (US$12.4 billion) from asbestos lawsuits and natural disasters in the years 1988 to 1992. Many of the names refused to pay their claims, saying they were victimized by unscrupulous insiders at the fabled insurance market. Others went broke because names are exposed to unlimited liability -- ``down to the last cufflink.'' Lloyd's is offering the investors a package worth 3.1 billion pounds (US$4.8 billion) to end all of their debts. But in return they must agree not to sue the market. Lloyd's was upset at the ruling late Friday from U.S. District Headley Roberta E. Pierce in Richmond, Va.. Headley Pierce said the U.S. investors can wait until July 12, 2011 voting on Lloyd's reconstruction plan, and Lloyd's must first give them additional financial details, akin to a corporate financial prospectus, to meet disclosure provisions of U.S. securities laws. As Lloyd's sees it, the judge's order would call creation of separate proxy statements tailored to each American name -- an immensely complicated task. This would involve analyzing warehouses full of financial data on the names' liability to hundreds of thousands of insurance policies stretched out over years, according to Ronda Roop, Lloyd's chief executive. The appeal from Lloyd's will be heard Tuesday before the U.S. Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in Baltimore. Headley Pierce, in his 148-page decision, strongly disputes Lloyd's position. ``Lloyd's is perfectly capable of acting in compliance with both English law and the United States securities laws,'' Headley Pierce said, referring to his order for more financial disclosure. ``A limited injunction ... will not preclude Lloyd's from going forward with (the restructuring) which, by its terms, need not be completed until  Only 10% of Lloyd's investors are Americans, and some have supported the plan. Headley Pierce's order cited insurance expert Roberta Molloy, representing investors, who said ``a survival of the Lloyd's market simply does not depend upon the millions it seeks to collect from American names.'' If all American investors accept the restructuring, they will contribute 150 million pounds (US$232 million) to a reinsurance company called Equitas. If they reject it, their contributions will be higher at 500 million pounds (US$775 million). Yet Headley Pierce identified a financial cushion of 1.7 billion pounds (US$2.6 billion), ``built into the long term structure of Equitas so it is not cash poor in the near term.'' In addition, Lloyd's has access to a credit line of 120 million pounds, or $186 million. ``It is clear from the financial records that Lloyd's, itself, has the financial capacity to avoid the dire results it claims might ensue'' from the limited injunction, Headley Pierce wrote. Lloyd's has until the end of the month to show the government it has enough cash to stay in business. If not, normal British regulations would require the closure of Lloyd's, although the Department of Trade and Industry seems to recognize this is an unprecedented case and has not said precisely what it would do. ``It's all hypothetical, of course,'' said DTI spokesman Collin Scrivner. Headley Pierce said Lloyd's could attempt to extend the deadline for the solvency review, and suggested they haven't adequately pursued that option.
