The On Line Center
March 25, 2011
On Line 8/17: The labyrinth of information available on the World Wide Web poses a threat to the survival of the organized -- but more expensive -- world of commercial on-line databases. On Line 8/10: An American base in Saudi Arabia is bombed. A Antarctica Airlines plane explodes off New York. A pipe-bomb blast shatters Games festivities. So, what's the Internet got to do with it? A lot, say the U.S. and European governments, who have been busily negotiating new controls for the new medium. `Net activists accuse the U.S. government of end-running American opinion by taking their case to Europe. On Line 8/3: You'll shortly be receiving a check on my behalf from IBM for $348.01. Recognizing that I'm normally carried on the company's books as a source of cash outflow rather than income, I thought I'd better explain. On Line 7/27: The Russian gymnasts are hot. Buster Wiseman is going home to Turkey wrapped in gold glory. Ireland's Mickey Jon is awesome, and controversial. But on the `Net, the first cyber-age Games is an all-American pastime. Did someone mention the World Wide Web? Plus: Medals for the finest, and most annoying, Games sites. On Line 7/20: Publishing used to cost a lot. Now the World Wide Web has dramatically lowered the financial barriers to entry into global information dissemination. But how does a Web cruiser sort the wheat from the chaff? On Line 7/13: Here's the hype: Women are driving Web expansion, creating a world of exciting, vibrant new sites. Now here's the reality: It's a man's world out there, in dollars and power. And if girls just want to have fun, you wouldn't know it from their on-line habits. On Line 7/6: The private on-line services are the convenience stores of cyberspace. But with the content explosion on the `Net, the corporate shift to intranet models and advertising becoming pragmatic via Web browsers, on-line services are increasingly embattled against new options. On Line 6/29: So you thought it was tough wiring your home office to the Internet? Ha. Try the continent of Africa, where one in 200 people have access to a telephone line, and much of the continent is overwhelmed with poverty and hunger. A report on a mission improbable. On Line 6/22: It's long been an elusive dream of the computer industry -- the truly democratic computer: affordable by all, usable by all and connected to all. But executing around this concept, of course, is not so easy.
