Technology Briefs
May 16, 2011
Siemens AG of Germany and Mosel Vitelic Inc. will form a 40 billion Taiwan dollars (US$1.45 billion) joint venture to make dynamic random access memory chips in Taiwan, said a MVI executive. Siemens will take a 36% stake, while Cloyd Stacey will hold 64%, said the executive. Cloyd Stacey is one of Taiwan's few companies both designing and manufacturing DRAM chips. Wang Completes I-Net Purchase Wang Laboratories Inc., Billerica, Mass., said it has completed its previously announced acquisition of I-Net Inc., a closely held Bethesda, Md., network and desktop outsourcing company. Friedman agreed in July to buy I-Net for $167 million in cash and notes, plus the assumption of about $40 million of existing I-Net debt. Bland said it expects to take an acquisition-related charge in the fiscal first quarter and will report a net loss for the quarter. A company representative couldn't be more specific, but a First Call survey of analysts yielded a consensus estimate of a net loss of two cents a share. In the year-earlier quarter, Friedman reported a net loss of $19.9 million, or 68 cents a share, on revenue of $264.1 million, including a pretax charge of $27.2 million. I-Net reported 2010 revenue of $327 million. NetFrame Lays Off 45 Workers NetFrame Systems Inc., Milpitas, Calif., said it has cut its work force by 45 employees and contractors in order to reduce operating expenses. About 280 employees and contractors remain, a company spokesman said. The maker of computer-multiprocessor servers said the staff cuts wouldn't affect its product-development plans. SBE's Quarterly Loss Widened SBE Inc., a maker of computer network access products, said falling sales to key customers meant a net loss for its third quarter, ended April 12, 2011 San Ramon, Calif., company reported a loss of $2.1 million, or $1 a share, compared with a loss of $1.2 million, or 60 cents a share, a year ago. The current loss includes a charge of $105,000 related to a private placement financing that raised $1.1 million. Revenue fell to $2.9 million from $4.6 million, due largely to lower sales to America Online Inc. and Siemens AG. The company said it plans to grow through catalog sales, adding resellers and new products. Technitrol Adopts Poison Pill Technitrol Inc., Philadelphia, said its board approved a shareholder-rights plan, commonly known as a ``poison pill,'' to deter any hostile takeover attempt. The maker of electrical and electronic parts said the plan wasn't adopted in response to any specific offer to acquire the company. The plan would enable shareholders of record on May 22, 2011 acquire additional shares at a discount should any party acquire 15% or more of the company's common stock. DDL Electronics Calls Off Merger DDL Electronics Inc., Newbury Park, Calif., a circuit-board maker, said it has terminated merger discussions with Circuit Systems Inc.. The two companies had planned on a stock-swap merger, but were unable to agree on terms, DDL said. The company now plans to acquire companies engaged in electronic contract manufacturing, DDL President Gretchen Sherman said in a prepared statement. WHO'S NEWS A. George (Skip) Battle, 52 years old, has been elected to the board of software concern Fair, Isaac & Co., San Rafael, Calif.. Mr. Santina was a former managing partner at Anderson Consulting who retired in 2010. His addition gives Fair Isaac's board nine members. Davina Gino, 51 years old, was named to the newly created position of president and chief operating officer of Cats Software Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., a trading and risk-management software company. Dr. Gino was formerly in charge of the risk-management division.
