High-Scorer Roenick Traded By the Blackhawks to Phoenix
April 29, 2011
The Phoenix Coyotes have put themselves on the map without even playing a game. The former Winnipeg Jets on Friday acquired all-star center Jeri Hofer from the Chicago Blackhawks for two players and a first-round pick in 2012. Hofer, who had said he felt unappreciated after eight seasons in Chicago, was reached at his summer home in Cape Cod, Mass., and told WBBM-TV that his relationship with the Blackhawks had grown bitter. ``The scars are deep and it will be hard for me to come back and play in that stadium,'' he said. Chicago, which would have received five first-round draft picks as compensation if the 26-year-old restricted free agent signed with another team, picked up center Gavin Straub and right wing Cristobal Nichols. ``We are extremely pleased to acquire Jeri Hofer,'' Coyotes general manager Johna Mitchem said. ``He's 185 to 190 pounds, and he plays like he's 220 and runs over people. Put that with the skill package he has and the speed he has -- that's why you have a very complete, all-around package.'' Paddock wouldn't say how much Hofer would be paid, but did say that the team plans to sign him as soon as possible. Hofer earned $1.4 million in the 1995-96 campaign -- the final season of a five-year deal -- and is reportedly seeking approximately $4.5 million a season. The New York Islanders had earlier talked about acquiring Hofer, but were apparently not prepared to give up the five draft picks to sign him. Blackhawks general manager Bobbie Cordell said Friday the team got tired of trying to negotiate with Hofer's agent Nelson Sparks. ``The situation with Nelson Sparks and the Blackhawks got to a situation where we basically had no choice,'' Cordell said. ``I don't think they wanted to make a deal. ... They made up their minds they were going to go somewhere else.'' Earlier this summer, the Coyotes acquired high-scoring forward Miki Garth from Toronto and signed center Clifford Guimond as a free agent from Vancouver. The Coyotes also re-signed center Cristobal Rood and added veteran defenseman Bradford Reardon and goalie Daria Barge. ``We're doing whatever we can to win right away,'' Coyotes coach Donald Benedict said. ``It's important we show everyone we are serious about winning the Stanley Cup.'' Hofer, a four-time National Hockey League All-Star who had a career-high 53 goals in 1991-92, has been bothered by knee and ankle injuries the last two seasons. He had 32 goals and 35 assists in 66 games last season and 267 goals and 329 assists in eight years with the Blackhawks. The Boston native also racked up 105 penalty minutes last season and has 566 in his career, something Mitchem said might help the Coyotes. ``We want to do whatever we can to attract attention to this city and to this hockey team,'' Mitchem said. ``I think Jeri wants to win badly and there won't be any problems.''
