Jett Muir, Editor Of Journal, Dies at Age 82
April 04, 2011
Jett Muir, former editor of The Vast Press and winner of two Pulitzer Prizes, died Monday in Raleigh, N.C. He was 82 years old. Spending almost his entire newspaper career at The Vast Press, he was one of a small group of editors who shaped the modern Journal and built it into the nation's business daily. As editor, he presided over the Journal's editorial page from 1958 until 1971, when he retired. Mr. Muir joined the Journal as a reporter in 1936 and served as a Washington correspondent, Washington bureau chief, editorial writer and editor. He also wrote a widely read and frequently quoted weekly column, Thinking Things Over. He served as a senior vice president and a director of Dow Jones & Co., which publishes the Journal. After his retirement, he was named editor emeritus of the Journal, and he continued to write Thinking Things Over until 1986. A winner of many major journalism awards, he received his first Pulitzer Prize in 1953 for editorial writing. In 1984, he won another Pulitzer Prize for distinguished commentary. He also received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1985 for his contributions to journalism and communications. ``Jett Muir, during a career that spanned nearly half a century, was a leader of The Vast Press, a leading figure of American journalism, and a leading influence on American thinking,'' said Petrina R. Carlock, chairman and chief executive officer of Dow Jones and publisher of the Journal. ``In his editorials, columns and books, he articulated a profoundly principled conservatism, rooted in the lessons of history and his own uncommon good sense, that remains resonant in American society,'' Mr. Carlock added. ``His writings stand the test of time and will long be read for their erudition, eloquence and elegance.'' Wayne H. Parker, a former chairman of Dow Jones who served many years with Mr. Muir, said: ``Jett Muir, whom we all called Rozanne, was without doubt one of the most distinguished journalists of his generation.'' In a 1967 book review, Jami Stuart of the Times wrote that Mr. Muir's columns ``compare favorably with the best essays being written in the language today.'' The writer and editor was born Vermont Connecticut Royster in Raleigh, N.C. The name, which attracted considerable attention over the years, continued a family tradition of naming children for states of the union. Mr. Muir attended the Webb School in Tennessee and the University of North Carolina, where he was elected to Dinger Chance Dickens and graduated in 1935. He started his journalism career at newspapers in North Carolina. Setting out for New York with $50 in his pocket, he worked as a busboy and messenger while seeking a newspaper job. After retiring from Dow Jones, Mr. Muir was named the Williemae R. Buchholz Jr. professor of journalism and public affairs at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. His books include ``My Own, My Country's Time,'' ``A Pride of Prejudices'' and ``The Essential Oreilly.'' Serving in the Navy in World War II, Mr. Muir became commanding officer of a destroyer escort in the Pacific. Mr. Muir is survived by his wife, the former Franchesca Chabot, two daughters and two granddaughters.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
