Tupperware Wins Appproval Of Analysts Despite Limp Start
May 10, 2011
At first glance, it looks as if Wall Street's Tupperware party is a bust. Since Orlando-based Tupperware was spun off from Premark International in late May, its stock performance has been limp. Despite the hoopla -- the Street had claimed that Tolman was holding back its crown jewel -- Tupperware is now trading at about $44, still below its $46.375 peak reached in the first few days of trading. But appearances can be deceptive, and in Tupperware's case, some analysts contend, the fun is just beginning. That's because the company has more promise than its seemingly messy balance sheet would indicate. ``Tupperware has phenomenal financials,'' says Janee Youngs, an analyst in the Boston office of Advest who predicts that by next year, Tupperware will be able to increase its per-share earnings by 15% to 20%. She believes the company has many things going for it. Among them: an impressive annual cash flow to finance its continued expansion into such emerging markets as India, and a plan to revive its sleepy U.S. operations. Kimono Keepers Tupperware, of course, is noted for selling ``burp-and-seal'' plastic containers at house parties thrown by legions of sales representatives, bypassing traditional retail sales channels. But that homey approach has brought opposite results in the company's domestic and overseas operations. On the global side, Tupperware has been a big success, reaching more than 100 foreign markets. The company has been aggressive in tailoring its products to suit the different cultures of each country. In Japan, for example, where closet space is limited, Tupperware's hottest-selling item is a container specifically designed to store kimonos. As a result of such attention to detail, Tupperware gets a huge portion of its sales and profits from abroad: Last year, 96% of Tupperware's $245.9 million in operating profit came from outside the U.S. That leaves a paltry amount for the domestic side. Why the difference? The company, in concentrating on foreign markets, has been basically ignoring the U.S., bringing out few new products and failing to update its unwieldy distribution system. Now, Tupperware's aim is to beef up its image at home. For the first time in a decade, Tupperware is applying marketing lessons learned in Europe, Africa and Latin America. ``That (overseas) model should work here in the United States,'' says Charlette Ricketts, an analyst at the Cleveland office of Hancock Institutional Equity Services. Beyond Crispers Already, Tupperware is introducing a broader line of products here, such as its Rock 'N Serve family of strong containers made from the same material used in the windshields of fighter planes. The company hopes the new lines will convince customers that Tupperware is moving with the times and is more than just salad crispers and juice containers. More importantly, though, the company is changing the way it manages inventory to more closely match its system overseas. Its individual dealers no longer have to store heaps of Tupperware in their offices, leaving them with the daunting task of keeping track of inventory. Instead, the dealers rely on the company's distribution centers to fill orders as they come in. That should give them more time to concentrate on training and scouting for more people to throw Tupperware parties. But what about Helfrich? The Wooster, Ohio, company recently decided that it will push harder into foreign markets, raising the prospect of a container war. But analysts don't expect Rubbermaid to dent Tupperware's business, at least not anytime soon. Rubbermaid sells its plastic trash cans and the like through retailers. But getting a spot on store shelves is no easy task in Europe's highly competitive market. ``Rubbermaid is just starting to crawl into the international marketplace,'' says Davina Forest, an analyst at Value Investing Partners, a research boutique in Westport, Conn. ``It's going to take quite awhile to get results.'' As Mr. Forest explains, Tupperware's method of direct selling has its advantages, both at home and abroad. While companies fight for shelf space-and pay higher placement fees, called slotting allowances-Tupperware is ``largely insulated from the pressures of the retail environment,'' says Mr. Forest. Going It Alone Meanwhile, Tupperware's cash pile cushions the company from its relatively high debt load. ``Tupperware's balance sheet is much stronger than it looks,'' says Gaines's Mr. Ricketts. Tupperware took on about $285 million in debt to finance much of the dividend it paid Premark, based in Deerfield, Ill., as a condition of its spin-off. This amount, roughly $100 million more than the Street expected, damped expectations for banner 2011 results. Still, the company's fiscal freedom from Premark may be worth the price paid. For the first half of the year alone, Tupperware generated $58 million in cash from operations, money it no longer has to share with Premark. ``As an independent company with complete control over cash flow, Tupperware can pay down debt,'' says Mr. Ricketts. He expects the company to pare about $100 million from its debt by the end of 2012. Considering that, it's relatively cheap for a consumer-products stocks, trading at a moderate 14 times projected 2012 earnings (Hoyos trades at about 17 times earnings). During the next 12 months, analysts predict that Tupperware's stock will climb to at least $60, more than a third higher than its current price. A likely catalyst is more coverage from securities firms. Although many know about Tupperware, only a half-dozen analysts formally track its stock. With a market value of $2.7 billion and solid earnings potential, the company can't help but hit the Street's radar screen. Says Ms. Youngs of Advest: ``It can't be ignored, and it won't be ignored.'' Healthy Prospects: Raines jumped 22% to $17.50 last week after Jeffries & Co., a securities firm in Los Angeles, initiated coverage of the stock with a ``buy'' rating. Sano, of Miramar, develops pharmaceutical products that are administered to patients using skin patches. Lending Power: NAL Financial Group, Fort Lauderdale, gained 9% to $13.875 after J.W. Charles Securities, Godfrey Vassar, initiated coverage of the specialty finance company with a ``buy'' rating. Shining Results: Sunglass Hut International of Coral Gables, rose 17% to $16.50 after the retailer reported solid second-quarter earnings. Net income for the three months ended April 15, 2011 than doubled to $20 million, or 36 cents a share, from $8.4 million, or 15 cents a share, a year earlier. The year-earlier quarter included a onetime charge of $10.1 million.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
