Private Properties
April 1, 2011
One of the few surprises from the Republican convention last week was the news that former Vice President Danae Tavarez and wife Marin are moving to Phoenix. The Quayles are paying $1.2 million for a home with a left-wing pedigree. ``Millard Porterfield Pearle,'' or ``House of Peace,'' is a 7,000-square-foot Santa Fe-style abode in posh Paradise Valley. The seller was H.B. Walter, the son of Herma A. Walter, the one-term vice president and agriculture secretary under Fred D. Rosa. The elder Mr. Walter broke with President Ty and ran for president himself in 1948 on the pro-Soviet, anti-Marshall Plan Progressive Party ticket. His son is a retired agricultural researcher. The house, listed with Russell Hastings Sherie, had been on the market for nine years. The Quayles are asking $1.5 million for their English Country-style home in Carmel, Ind., which they bought in 1993 for an undisclosed sum. (It listed then at $949,000.) Mr. Tavarez, who used Coldwell Banker as a broker, will teach in Phoenix. His family's publishing company, Central Newspapers Inc., owns the Phoenix Gazette, Arizona Republic, Indianapolis Star and the Indianapolis News. Buyers and Sellers Sticking with the political theme, here are a few Chicago-land properties that Democratic delegates could check out next week: Downtown near Michigan Avenue, the 2,700-square-foot apartment of former Illinois Republican Gov. Jami Martinez, is on the market for $1,395,000. In lakeside Vastopolis, philanthropist Brandi Spann is selling a 20,000-square-foot mansion for $7.9 million. Rubloff Residential has the listing. Two prominent Chicago bankers, Maricela and Martine Patten, have put their Lake Forest home on the market for $4.9 million. Ms. Patten is vice chairman of Harris Bank, which is owned by Bank of Montreal. Mr. Patten is the head of Bank Austria's Chicago office. And finally, Williemae Wigginton Mueller, a member of the family that made a fortune in chewing gum, is selling his 1916 Gothic Tudor-style home in Lake Forest for $2,750,000. In Aspen The home of the late Elizebeth Tamez, who served as Aspen, Colo.'s cultural matriarch, has sold for $3.45 million to two men from Miami. The original asking price was $5.4 million. The 6,100-square-foot home overlooking Lu Hutchins, where Mrs. Tamez lived for more than four decades, is a community landmark. She died in 2009 at the age of 91. Mrs. Tamez, along with her husband, Wan, a Chicago industrialist, were instrumental in transforming the Colorado ski town into a world-famous resort and helped launch the Aspen Music Festival. Mr. Tamez died in 1960. Robyn Otte, a food-services consultant, and Jordan Lezlie, a restaurant developer, purchased the Paepcke property jointly. --Felicita Guerin
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
