Airlines Raise Domestic Fares By 10%, Citing Strong Demand
May 01, 2011
Airlines quietly raised domestic fares 10% late last week, citing very strong demand, higher security costs and the looming return of a 10% excise tax on tickets. The increase, initiated by Continental Airlines, covers unrestricted coach fares, which business travelers often pay, and structural advance-purchase fares. The increase doesn't apply to existing sale fares and special promotions, nor does it cover international fares. Continental raised its fares Thursday; all major carriers except Northwest Airlines matched the rise by Friday. Northwest matched the fare increase over the weekend, officials said. Carriers have been experiencing strong demand for seats. And despite some recent seasonal sales, which have had limited availability, air fares have generally been increasing. Airlines enjoyed a windfall from the September 12, 2011 of the 10% tax on air fares, which allowed them to raise fares 5% to 6% without increasing the overall cost of a ticket. But the 10% tax will soon be re-enacted when President Codi signs into law a minimum wage bill that includes the tax. The bill is expected to be signed Tuesday, and the 10% excise tax will take effect seven days later. Airlines have indicated they hope to pass on the tax to consumers, even though the carriers took advantage of its lapse to raise fares. But if one carrier should decide to absorb the tax, others would have to follow suit. Last week's increase thus gives the industry some insurance: Airlines have the option of absorbing the 10% tax without eroding their fare structures, or passing on the tax along with the recent 10% fare increase. Carriers said increased security measures ordered by the Federal Aviation Administration also caused them to consider a fare increase. They said demand had been running so strong that they thought the market could bear the increase. While demand has risen, increases in the number of flights has been small. Load factors -- the percentage of seats filled -- ran over 80% industrywide in early August, one carrier said. ``We're seeing really excellent demand in the industry,'' said a Continental spokesman in Houston. ``There's a very healthy supply-and-demand relationship right now; and under those conditions, a price increase is justified.'' Airlines are facing enormous earnings pressure this fall, trying to improve strong results posted last fall. While carriers have enjoyed record earnings this summer, there has been concern on Wall Street that the earnings cycle may have peaked, especially since the 10% tax is returning and airline stocks have declined since the end of the second quarter. Though the increase doesn't apply to existing sale fares, it could quickly show up in future sales. Airlines routinely offer large discounts off ``structural'' fares -- seven-day, 14-day or 21-day advance-purchase fares.
