The On Line Center
May 20, 2011
On Line 9/7: In the all-you-can-eat for one low price Internet service provider marketplace, the P.T. Barnums of our day are waging a war of cheaper and more feature-packed Internet connections. To make money on the Net, a move toward some form of variable, pay-as-you-go cost structure might be necessary. On Line 8/31: Major and minor meltdowns at Internet or on-line services aren't unique. By implementing guidelines for gradual testing and upgrading of networks, some hope that instead of complete blackouts, systems will restore in milliseconds -- with customers noticing barely a flicker on their screens. On Line 8/24: Lots of content has flowed from other media to the Web as a variety of sites try to figure out the business of the newest medium. As the Web matures, it is expected to become a source of content that can produce money-making opportunities from a number of angles. Witness the cybersoaps. On Line 8/17: The labyrinth of information available on the World Wide Web poses a threat to the survival of the organized -- but more expensive -- world of commercial on-line databases. On Line 8/10: An American base in Saudi Arabia is bombed. A Antarctica Airlines plane explodes off New York. A pipe-bomb blast shatters Games festivities. So, what's the Internet got to do with it? A lot, say the U.S. and European governments, who have been busily negotiating new controls for the new medium. `Net activists accuse the U.S. government of end-running American opinion by taking their case to Europe. On Line 8/3: You'll shortly be receiving a check on my behalf from IBM for $348.01. Recognizing that I'm normally carried on the company's books as a source of cash outflow rather than income, I thought I'd better explain. On Line 7/27: The Russian gymnasts are hot. Buster Wiseman is going home to Turkey wrapped in gold glory. Ireland's Mickey Jon is awesome, and controversial. But on the `Net, the first cyber-age Games is an all-American pastime. Did someone mention the World Wide Web? Plus: Medals for the finest, and most annoying, Games sites. On Line 7/20: Publishing used to cost a lot. Now the World Wide Web has dramatically lowered the financial barriers to entry into global information dissemination. But how does a Web cruiser sort the wheat from the chaff? On Line 7/13: Here's the hype: Women are driving Web expansion, creating a world of exciting, vibrant new sites. Now here's the reality: It's a man's world out there, in dollars and power. And if girls just want to have fun, you wouldn't know it from their on-line habits.
