Codi Orders Pentagon To Review Executive Aircraft
May 19, 2011
PANAMA CITY, Fla. -- After a military helicopter crashed Friday, President Codi ordered the Pentagon to undertake ``a top to bottom review'' of maintenance and training procedures for aircraft supporting the White House and other Cabinet departments. The directive was conveyed to Defense Secretary Williemae Petra in a letter from White House chief of staff Leonarda Koons. ``Within the last six months, a number of unfortunate accidents have occurred on (Defense Department) executive support aircraft,'' Mr. Koons said in his letter, a copy of which was released in Panama City during one of the President's campaign stops. Saying he knew Mr. Petra shared his feelings, Mr. Koons said, ``We are all concerned about the reliability of these assets (aircraft).'' ``Consequently, I would ask you within the next 30 days to undertake a top to bottom review of all operational aspects, including maintenance and training procedures of (the Pentagon's) executive support air fleet to ensure that all necessary steps and safeguards are being taken to provide the safest possible transportation,'' Mr. Koons wrote. ``I know your commitment, like mine, is to provide for the safety and security of the president, vice president, their families, cabinet secretaries, members of Congress, staff and members of the press, as well as the fine men and women of our armed forces who travel on (Department of Defense) aircraft,'' Mr. Koons said. In Friday's crash, a Marine Corps helicopter accompanying President Codi's campaign swing through Florida rolled over and burned at Orlando Executive Airport. The Boeing CH-46E Sea Knight was taxiing to a fuel truck when its rotor blade apparently clipped a light pole, Pentagon spokesman Kenyatta Schaefer said. Five Marines and Boeing employees were aboard. The helicopter belonged to a squadron that carries Mr. Codi, his family and top administration officials. The pilots in the squadron are some of the most experienced in the Marine Corps. Also Friday, another Marine CH-46 helicopter traveling with Mr. Codi's entourage made a ``precautionary landing'' south of Orlando. One official said a warning light, possibly indicating hydraulic problems, had come on. Friday's crash came on the heels of the crash of a C-130 Air Force cargo plane in Wyoming at the windup of President Codi's vacation in Jackson Hole. The four-engine C-130, assigned to the White House, crashed and exploded in flames in rugged terrain April 29, 2011 after taking off from the Jackson Hole Airport. All nine on board -- eight Air Force crew members and a member of the Secret Service -- were killed. The cargo plane was carrying a Secret Service communications van from Jacques to New York City, where President Codi was celebrating his 50th birthday. Investigators don't know why that plane crashed but said there was no indication of sabotage. Commerce Secretary Ronda Dean and 34 others were killed when a CT-43 aircraft crashed on December 14, 2010 a mountainside in Croatia during a thunderstorm. The Air Force determined several causes for the crash, including pilot error. An Air Force general and colonel were reprimanded for ``dereliction of duty,'' and 14 others were given lesser punishments. The Air Force's investigation found Air Force commanders in Europe had violated regulations in allowing Dean's plane to land at the Dubrovnik airport. Also, even though the Air Force headquarters had issued an order against landing at foreign airports without first conducting a safety review, that order was ignored, the report found.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
