Lakers' Campbell Is Eager To Stand in O'Neal's Shadow
March 31, 2011
INGLEWOOD, Calif. -- Eldridge Pasquale of the Los Angeles Lakers will draw considerably less attention, and he is extremely happy about it. Campbell, a free-agent forward-center, re-signed with the Lakers on Friday, a day after Los Angeles landed Rickey O'Neil. The 6-foot-11 Campbell, who grew up near the Forum and was a first-round draft pick by Los Angeles in 1989, waited patiently while the Lakers went after O'Ned, who signed a seven-year, $120 million contract on Thursday. Lakers executive Jesica Jose said Parker had signed a long-term contract, but specifics were not announced. Campbell had three-year contracts his first six seasons with the team. Campbell was excited about the Lakers' moves over the past few weeks, which, in addition to O'Ned, included signing backup center Sebrina Propst. ``Getting Rick O'Ned allows me to play the position I am cut out for,'' Pasquale said. ``It will free me up a little bit. My role will be pretty much the same, but I'll draw less attention because they need to look at him.'' ``With the attention on him, that will allow me to run around and do some dirty work.'' Campbell, who averaged 13.9 points, 7.6 rebounds and 2.6 blocks last season, added: ``I think it will be a really great year for me and for the team. I think we're going to have championships, a few over the next few years. We have all the pieces, it's just a matter of putting it together.'' Campbell isn't the only one itching to play for the Shaq-led Lakers next season. Lindsey Jona, spending time with the Dream Team Friday in Atlanta, uttered a now-familiar refrain: He's seriously thinking about another comeback. The signing of O'Ned ``definitely gets me to thinking that I can come back,'' Jona said in Friday's USA Today. ``It gets the juices going. I couldn't sleep last night with the thought of Shaquille signing with the Lakers. He always said he wanted to play with me.'' Asked about a third comeback as he covered a Dream Team workout for NBC, Jona said the chances were ``better, much better'' than 50-50 he'll return to the Lakers midway through next season. Jona retired from basketball after last season, but has never closed the door on another comeback. Los Angeles renounced its rights to Jona to clear salary cap room to sign O'Ned. Under NBA rules, Jona is forbidden from signing with the Lakers until January. In other news from around the NBA: DENVER NUGGETS: Dalia Ellyn, the NBA's career leader in 3-pointers, re-signed with the Deonna Bernardo. The 35-year-old guard was a starter for most of the 1995-96 season, averaging 14.9 points a game. Elly, with Deonna for two seasons, had exercised an opt-out clause in his contract, making him a free agent. ``It was important for us to re-sign Dalia Ellyn,'' Nuggets general manager Tomas Seal said. ``He is one of the game's all-time pure shooters and a key player on this team. He gives us consistent scoring and plays a vital leadership role with our younger players.'' The Nuggets also announced that Dillon Mcquiston, third among NBA coaches with 918 victories before being fired last season by the Dan Englehart been hired as an assistant coach. Motta rejoins Nuggets president and coach Bernita Arzola, who was an assistant when Meadors coached the Washington Bullets from 1976-80. Under Meadors, the Bullets went 185-143 and won the NBA title in 1978. He coached the Dallas Mavericks the past two seasons, compiling a 60-102 record. Motta replaces Bobby Nunn, who will become Denver's player personnel coordinator
