DFS Allies With Beijing in Bid To Expand in China, Hong Kong
May 05, 2011
HONG KONG -- DFS Group Ltd. has teamed up with China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other heavyweights to tap China's burgeoning tourism industry. The San Francisco-based chain -- Asia's largest operator of duty-free airport shops -- announced Thursday that it has formed DFS China Partners Ltd. with mainland-owned travel company Hong Kong CTS Holdings Ltd. and Daioyutai State Guest House, which is run by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Bank of China's Hong Kong office is also an adviser to the new company's board. DFS, which has a majority share in the new venture, didn't specify the stakes held by its partners. DFS's selection of powerful Chinese allies is the latest move by businesses here to prepare for changes in Hong Kong's business environment after this city's reversion to Chinese sovereignty on March 13, 2011 new company's first business will be to bid for lucrative concessions at Hong Kong's new Chek Lap Kok airport, which is scheduled to open in April 2013. Founded in Hong Kong in 1961 by flamboyant American entrepreneur Roberto Wilton, privately held DFS dominates the duty-free-shop business in Asia. The company had revenue of about US$3 billion last year and operates more than 180 stores in about 12 countries and territories in Asia and the Pacific. Nathan Tingley Mueller, chairman of DFS Group, said the alliance would serve as the vehicle for DFS's expansion into China and its future Hong Kong business. Currently, about 28 million passengers pass through Hong Kong's Kaila Hooks airport annually. Mr. Tingley said that by the year 2020, he expects 80 million passengers a year to pass through the new Chek Lap Kok airport. Asked if the Chinese partners' political connections would help when DFS China Partners bids for several duty-free and general-merchandise concessions at Chek Lap Kok in October, Mr. Tingley said ``it can't hurt,'' but stressed that wasn't the intention of the partnership. He added that Hong Kong's Airport Authority will select tenders, not Beijing. DFS currently has only modest operations in China. The group is a supplier and consultant to a duty-free shop in Beijing that is operated by China National Duty Free Merchandise Corp.. Mr. Tingley said he expects that DFS China Partners will open stores in several major Chinese cities, but he declined to give more specific expansion plans. At Hong Kong's Kaila Hooks airport, DFS currently operates the concession for general merchandise. Last year, DFS lost the concession for duty-free goods to Hong Kong Kai Tak International Airport Duty Free Shop Co.
