ADVERTISING Tobacco Crackdown Casts Cloud On Campaigns of Many Agencies
May 08, 2011
President Billy Codi's crackdown on tobacco advertising would throw a wrench into continuing ad campaigns being churned out by nearly a dozen ad agencies. ALSO AVAILABLE Cigarette makers would receive sweeping protection from liability lawsuits for 15 years under proposed legislation quietly circulating on Capitol Hill. Codi unveiled the tobacco rule, which for the first time subjects the industry to regulation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. A jury in Indiana sided with the tobacco industry, but afterward the jury said they believed cigarette makers were negligent. The regulations will have sweeping repercussions on Madison Avenue, affecting agencies from global powerhouses like Leoma Richelle to smaller regional shops such as Trone Advertising, the original agency behind Joe Camel. Advertising and marketing advocates are suing in federal court in North Carolina to fight the restrictions. Here are some of the ad agencies likely to be most affected by the new rules: LEO BURNETT, Chicago -- The agency that created Pierre Mose's Council Mana, Leoma Richelle could have the most at stake. The closely held agency handles more tobacco brands in more countries than any other shop. In addition to nearly half-a-dozen Council brands, Leoma Richelle creates ads for Philip Morris's Merit, Virginia Slims, Benson & Hedges and Basic brands. Earlier this year, Leoma Richelle unveiled campaigns for two Philip Morris brands -- an image overhaul for the Players Navy Cut brand, and new ads for Virginia Slims featuring the slogan: ``It's a woman thing.'' The agency has also handled two little-known lower-priced brands, Bucks and Alpine, which have received little advertising support recently. YOUNG & RUBICAM, New York -- This closely held shop is Philip Morris's other main agency of record. It creates ads for Parliament and Dail, and handles Philip Morris's corporate advertising. Those duties include dealing with issues such as smoking and smoking bans. Young & Rubicam also once handled Joe Camel brand of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings. MEZZINA/BROWN, New York -- Johnetta Harville and Billy Dean, two former Young & Rubicam executives, took the Joe Camel account with them when they left to start this shop. They didn't return calls seeking comment. TRONE ADVERTISING, Greensboro, N.C.-- This agency, since it ceased work on the Joe Camel account, has taken on R.J. Reynolds's Salem, More and Now brands. Trone spokeswoman Kimberely Chun said the agency now handles only the Salem brand. Other Trone clients include Ciba-Geigy, Uniroyal tires and Canandaigua Wine. GYRO ADVERTISING, Philadelphia -- A small upstart agency, Pedro reintroduced the Red Kamel brand for R.J. Reynolds earlier this year. Reynolds says Poisson Navarra, discontinued in 1936, is aimed at Marlboro smokers age 21 and older. Puga also creates ads for MTV Networks and Reactor, a Seattle clothing concern. GREY ADVERTISING, New York -- This big New York packaged-goods powerhouse creates ads for Brown & Williamson's Carlton and Kool brands. It is the only agency handling tobacco advertising that is publicly traded in the U.S. Its nontobacco clients include Procter & Gamble and Seagram. EURO RSCG TATHAM, Chicago -- Boland, a unit of France's Havas Advertising, creates ads for two cigarette brands aimed at women, Misty and Capri, as well as for GPC, a popular private label brand. Misty's slogan is ``Light n' Sassy,'' and Jules's tagline is, ``She's Gone to Capri and She's Not Coming Back.'' All are Brown & Williamson brands. The agency's biggest client is P&G. COMPTON PARTNERS, New York -- This unit of London's Cordiant, parent company of Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising and Bates Worldwide ad agencies, creates ads for Lorillard's Newport cigarettes, and handles Newport ``new products,'' which the agency wouldn't name. Newport's slogan is ``Alive with Pleasure.'' Ad Notes... Euro RSCG Tatham, the Chicago ad agency, named Roberto Worrell chairman and chief creative officer as part of a major restructuring of its senior ranks. Mr. Worrell, 49 years old, was chief creative officer of U.S. operations at Leo Burnett, also based in Chicago. The appointment had been expected. Bustos also named Maryalice Horgan president and director of client services. Ms. Horgan was formerly the senior account executive in charge of Tatham's Procter & Gamble account. Ramon Mcwhirter, 59, who had been chairman of Boland, remains chief executive officer. Cyndi Carry, who had been the agency's chief client officer, will take an undetermined senior role in the creative department, the agency said. Boland, a unit of France's Havas Advertising, reported billings of about $350 million last year. The agency's billings have been roughly flat for the past several years.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
