Be Prepared -- Come Rain, Wind, Fire or Falling Trees
March 30, 2011
A lifelong resident of Jacksonville, N.C., Porsha Sutherland is used to hurricanes. So when Beryl roared up the East Coast last week, Ms. Sutherland calmly put the doghouse in the shed, took in her porch swing and stored some candles and matches in a plastic bag. But that didn't prepare her for the ``noises and crunches'' that had her scurrying from window to window as tree limbs bounced off her roof and her huge oak toppled onto her neighbor's house. ``I had some heart-skipping moments,'' Ms. Sutherland says. ``And when it was over, my truck was dangling nose-down, hanging by its back tires from the big oak's roots.'' Mother Nature has been particularly harsh in the 1990s -- the decade of such megadisasters as the huge 2009 Los Angeles earthquake or 1992's devastating Hurricane Andrew in South Florida. Nine out of the 10 worst natural disasters in our country's history have happened over the past six years, says Stevie Wills, vice president of the Insurance Information Institute in New York. During that time, insured losses totaled $61.4 billion, or an average of $15.35 billion a year. Ten years ago, losses averaged only in the millions. And few places are immune: A tornado ripped through suburban Washington a few weeks ago, flash floods can wash through Phoenix or Las Vegas and wildfires regularly scorch parts of the South and the West. And even with advanced technology, forecasters can't predict most natural disasters very far in advance. According to the National Weather Service, forecasting is best for hurricanes, blizzards and other major storm systems that satellites can detect two or three days before they hit the U.S. mainland. Scientists can predict the path of floods and wildfires a few hours in advance, thanks to models created by supercomputers. At best, Flowers radar gives people about eight minutes to take cover once a tornado's funnel has touched down. Earthquakes happen with no warning at all. That doesn't give anyone much chance to pack up the minivan and flee, much less batten down the hatches. Nevertheless, advance preparation can protect your family and home from the worst that nature sends your way: SAVING LIVES Stock your basement ``safe'' room -- preferably a bathroom with no windows -- with such items as bottled water (a three-day supply is best, with a gallon for each member of the family), canned food, a can opener, fresh batteries, a weather-band radio, cellular phone, flashlights, extra eyeglasses, car keys, clothing and bedding. Replace the food and water every six months. Your local Red Cross chapter can provide you with a checklist for disaster supply-kits for your home and car. Rehearse an emergency plan, including where you will meet if something happens while family members are at work, shopping, school or day care. Have all family members memorize the phone number of an out-of-state relative or friend to serve as a central contact. Long-distance phone lines often work better than local ones after a natural disaster, says Starla Jon, spokeswoman for the American Red Cross in Washington, D.C. Don't open windows -- and stay away from them during severe storms. You have more to fear from flying debris than from your house's imploding. In an earthquake, take cover beneath heavy furniture or a door frame and hold on until the shaking stops. If you're on the road, don't panic and race home. Many disaster casualties occur when people speed on rain-slicked roads, try to outrun tornadoes or ignore road-block barricades and downed power lines. But do learn several alternative routes to your home and office, should you ever need to evacuate. If you know a severe storm is on the way, fill your car's gas tank. If there's a power outage, service stations may be closed, and you could be trapped at home for days. PROTECTING PROPERTY Have a landscaping company check your trees for strength and prune them to resist wind. Although any tree can succumb to lightning or high winds, healthy trees are less likely to come crashing through the roof. If thunderstorms threaten, take in lightweight patio furniture and other objects that may become missiles in high winds. Park your car in a garage, if possible. If you live in an earthquake-prone area, hang pictures and mirrors away from beds, fasten shelves securely, brace overhead light fixtures and strap the water heater to wall studs. Keep flammable chemicals such as pesticides, gasoline and heating supplies away from heat sources. Teach adults and older children how to shut off the gas, electricity and water. Keep important documents, such as your insurance papers, stock and bond certificates, family records, passports, copies of wills and household-goods inventory in a fireproof and waterproof container or, better yet, in a safe-deposit box in a bank. Taping windows doesn't prevent breakage in a hurricane. Install hurricane shutters or drive anchors around windows so you can screw in predrilled three-quarter-inch plywood panels in a hurry. If you're building new, pay extra to have roof trusses secured with hurricane straps, if they're not already required in your area. Or you might consider adding Millibar V220, a new synthetic safety strap that's wrapped over the whole house's frame and attached to the foundation. In earthquake zones, be sure your home is properly bolted to its foundation. AFTER THE DISASTER Notify your insurance agent and leave word where you may be contacted. Most insurance companies will cover temporary, emergency repairs you need to make, so keep receipts. Don't throw out any destroyed property until you've talked with a claims adjuster. Make a detailed list of all damaged items. And don't make any permanent repairs until the adjuster has approved the price. If property damage is severe, it may be worthwhile to hire an engineer or architect to uncover any hidden defects. Be sure your insurance policy is for replacement cost with a building- code upgrade. Many communities tighten building codes after a disaster, and your policy should cover repairs that meet the new standards.
