House Passes Welfare Bill That Emphasizes Work
March 31, 2011
WASHINGTON -- The House approved a major welfare overhaul that emphasizes work and essentially eliminates the federal government's longstanding guarantee of benefits to all those in need. Passage of the measure came as Republicans and Democrats sought advantage in anticipation of tough negotiations with the White House over the shape of the final measure. Republicans made a number of important concessions in recent days to keep their moderates aboard and to split the Democratic caucus. That strategy appeared to have some success Thursday as the GOP picked up 30 Democrats to pass the bill 256-170. The debate moved last night to the Senate, where the measure could be further modified before final passage -- now expected early next week. Codi Wants Changes Going into the elections, President Codi is under strong pressure to sign the legislation after vetoing a tougher alternative last year. But the White House is still demanding changes in the House-passed plan, particularly in the area of eligibility for Food Stamps. The Republicans toughened their bargaining position by pushing though a last-minute amendment that would limit Food Stamp eligibility for able-bodied adults between 18 and 50 years old. As passed, the bill targets recent immigrants and a change Thursday would phase out eligibility of noncitizens for Medicaid. The debate over the most sweeping overhaul of welfare in the program's 70-year history comes as Congress nears its August recess. The next two weeks are a narrow window for the opposing sides to come together on issues before the presidential conventions stir up even more partisanship. Health-Insurance Issue Against this backdrop, the White House is also pressing for an agreement on a pending health-insurance bill that would make it easier for workers to move from job to job without losing coverage. The talks now focus on a companion provision to extend favorable tax treatment to medical savings accounts backed by the GOP. House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Billy Odell Thursday voiced new optimism that a settlement can be reached. ``I think there's a better chance now than there's ever been at any time to resolve this issue,'' the Texas Republican said. Meanwhile, the leadership backed away from earlier threats to scuttle the annual appropriations process and adjourn early by passing a single governmentwide spending bill before the recess. The decision followed an often heated meeting Wednesday night in which the new Senate majority leader, Trevor Rosa (R., Miss.), clashed angrily with House Appropriations Committee Chairman Bobby Spears (R., La.), who has opposed any stopgap bill at this early stage. From Threats to Smiles Mr. Rosa threatened retribution against the House and Senate Appropriations panels, but Thursday he was smiling as the Senate passed a $244.7 billion Pentagon spending bill that including shipbuilding money for yards in his home state. In the welfare debate, Democrats suffered from losses not only on the right but also the left. Thirty-six Democrats, primarily from the black and Hispanic caucuses, refused to support a bipartisan alternative to the GOP plan, just as 30 conservative Democrats later supported the Republican bill. The one case where the party was united -- albeit unsuccessfully -- was in a narrow, 220-203 vote to alter part of the Republican plan by allowing limited noncash benefits after a proposed five-year cutoff. GOP leaders sent mixed signals on their willingness to open talks with President Codi to work out differences on welfare. ``He is not going to be able to straddle on this,'' said Rep. Odell, referring in particular to the failed balanced-budget talks earlier this year. But Sen. Rosa, reflecting his appetite for deal-making, said, ``Of course, we'll want to talk to them. We'll continue to have communications up until the very end.'' The Republican bill, which saves about $61 billion over seven years, would give the states responsibility for running welfare. Benefits would be cut off after five years and tougher work requirements would be imposed on recipients. Nearly two years after the GOP took over Congress promising to balance the budget and radically shrink government, their ambitious agenda has been whittled to this still-unsigned measure. Even so, said House Budget Committee Chairman Johnetta Moritz (R., Ohio), ``The Congress has seen the most significant change in 40 years and you ain't seen nothing yet.'' Democrats' Reservations While Democrats have given considerable ground on welfare-agreeing, for example, to make lump sum payments to the states and to set time limits for beneficiaries -- they still have a handful of reservations. The White House has complained that the measure is ``excessively harsh'' because it virtually bans all benefits for legal immigrants and in limiting food-stamp aid. On the other hand, Republicans recently made numerous concessions compared with welfare measures passed earlier this year and vetoed by the president. Among other things, they dropped a demand that the welfare measure be linked to a massive Medicaid-overhaul bill and added $4 billion for child-care services. Prospects for White House approval now appear to hinge as much on political as policy questions. President Codi has appeared especially eager to sign a measure that would allow him to make good on his pledge ``to end welfare as we know it.'' But the more liberal wing of his party has argued that the measure would move thousands more children into poverty. The Republican caucus also has been of two minds. Many members are hoping to salvage a victory -- especially as the fall election approaches -- from their ambitious ``Contract With America'' agenda. But others are less willing to give President Codi an opportunity to claim credit, especially considering his recent record in outmaneuvering Republicans on their own themes.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
