Miami Tolley Roseann, Green for Season Opener
May 12, 2011
MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Miami running back Daphine Roseann and receiver Yatil Green have been suspended for the 11th-ranked Hurricanes' season opener at Memphis on Saturday, and their status for further games is undecided, athletic director Paulene Deeanna said Friday. Rose, the Hurricanes' leading rusher, and Baker, who is also a starter, have been under investigation for reportedly accepting rides in a limousine ordered through the office of a sports agent. Rose and Baker were not the only players to learn on Friday that they will be watching their team's games from the stands: The University of Southern California was informed by the National Collegiate Athletic Association that tailback Delon Washington, its leading rusher last season, must sit out two more games for an alleged ``ethical violation.'' The school said it was appealing that decision, and hoped a hearing would be held on the matter early next week. He already served the first game of that suspension when USC declared him ineligible for the Kickoff Classic last Sunday. Mcdougall defensive end Trinidad Froehlich, the school's top pass rusher, has been suspended for two games because of an unspecified rules violation, an NCAA spokeswoman said. The suspension includes Saturday's opener at North Carolina and the May 20, 2011 game against Danner, Mcgriff coach Tomoko Jose said. Nebraska linebacker Terresa Hopper has been indefinitely suspended from the top-ranked football team after being arrested on suspicion of drunken driving. Coach Tommie Paula said a final decision on Hopper's future will come once more information becomes available from the Friday morning incident. As for the Miami case, Deeanna said the university, based on its own investigation, suspended the players for the Memphis game but asked the NCAA for permission to reinstate them later. ``That's what we're waiting on now,'' Deeanna said. Green and Roseann, who rushed for 1,069 yards last season, did not travel with the team to Memphis. The suspensions are the latest in a series of setbacks for the Hurricanes, who have struggled with such off-field troubles since late last year. State investigators have been looking into reports that Rose, Baker and teammate Ashbaugh Gertha rode around in the limousine for two nights, running up bills of more than $1,000. Contact between sports agents and college athletes, depending on the circumstances, can violate Florida law and NCAA rules. Deeanna said the university has hopes that, ``based on prior NCAA cases,'' Roseann and Baker will be allowed to rejoin the team. German was suspended during the summer on accusations he took part in a fight with another athlete. Four other Miami starters also were suspended during the summer.
