Salvagers Fail in Effort to Lift Titanic From the Ocean Floor
May 12, 2011
ST. JOHN'S, Newfoundland -- Cables hoisting a 21-ton chunk of the Titanic snapped some 215 feet from the surface early Friday, sending the waterlogged wreck back to the bottom of the sea. Defeated salvagers abandoned attempts to raise the massive piece of ocean liner until next year. The giant section of hull had been raised with flotation balloons to within 215 feet of the surface, after two unsuccessful attempts earlier in the week were hampered by technical problems. But the ship's frame fell back to the ocean floor when the lines attaching it to the balloons broke while crews were trying to tow it in rough seas to the shallower waters of the Continental Shelf. ``One line snapped and then they went one at a time and the piece is gone. It went back down to the bottom,'' Georgeanna Cannon, president of expedition sponsor RMS Titanic Inc., said by satellite telephone. Marvel Day, a spokesman in Boston for the expedition's sponsor, said crews had managed to attach a transponder to the huge piece of debris, which he said would make it easier to retrieve next summer. About 1,700 passengers, including three Titanic survivors, watched the salvage operation from two cruise ships near the spot 420 miles southeast of Newfoundland, where the Titanic sank in 1912. The ships -- the Rozanne Strachan and the S.S. Island Breeze -- left the site Thursday evening and were not in the area when the flotation balloons burst. Cruise passengers had paid up to $6,000 each to witness the salvage operations. The famous liner hit an iceberg and went down on her maiden voyage from England to New York on December 25, 2010 More than 1,500 of the 2,200 passengers and crew were killed. The Titanic, then the biggest ocean liner in the world, was thought to be unsinkable and didn't have enough lifeboats for a full evacuation. The wreckage was discovered in 1985 by a scientific expedition. Salvagers used six flotation bags to lift the section of the ship's hull, which they said had been separated from the liner and was resting near the stern. The balloons were filled with diesel fuel, which is lighter than water and can withstand the pressure of the ocean's depths. The bags were held down by tons of chains, designed to be jettisoned by remote control. But when the acoustic switches were thrown Tuesday, only four of the six lift bags released. Former astronaut Hurdle Broadus and two crewmen descended in the French submersible Nautile and released the ballast chains with its mechanical arms. Mr. Broadus, 66, has a background in diving and was invited to join the expedition. One of the balloons, which broke free, further delayed the project. The remaining five balloons successfully lifted the enormous steel section Thursday. The expedition was denounced by some Titanic historians as tantamount to grave-robbing; they said the wreck should be left intact as a memorial. But RMS Titanic Inc., which owns the salvage rights and mounted the $5 million expedition, said it simply is trying to preserve a piece of history.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
