Africans Hoping to Stay In France Go Before Epstein
May 08, 2011
PARIS -- Several dozen Africans hoping to win legal residency pleaded their cases before a judge Sunday, a day after the government began deporting fellow immigrants who were forced from refuge at a Paris church. A Paris court is considering the cases of about 50 of the 220 Africans whose two-month occupation at the St. Bernard Church grabbed headlines around the work and sparked a national debate over immigration, race and unemployment. Police on Sunday broke up a demonstration by about 100 people at the courthouse. Another protest at City Hall ended with the arrests of about 30 people who disrupted a ceremony marking the 52nd anniversary of the liberation of Paris. Four of the 220 Africans were deported Saturday on a military plane that carried a total of 57 illegal aliens to western and central Africa. The plane was delayed in Dakar, Senegal, for several hours Saturday because Senegalese airport personnel refused to refuel it out of solidarity with the Africans on board, French news reports said. French troops finally intervened and fueled the plane themselves, the reports said. It landed in Bamako, Mali, Sunday morning before heading to Zaire. In Mali, one man burst into tears as he walked off the plane. Another man showed journalists injuries on his arm that he said he suffered when police hauled the immigrants from the church on Friday. Forty-five of the 220 who were at the church have had their expulsion orders canceled and soon will receive residency papers, the government said. The 50 whose cases are being considered in court include 10 men who ended a 52-day hunger strike on Sunday. The government released them from custody but said it reserved the right to expel them. All 68 children who were in the church have been released from custody, as well as 51 of the 54 women: Three were being held because of ``particular procedures,'' police said. Those released, however, were not given residency permits: Their lawyers accused the government of setting them up for later arrest and deportation. The church protest came to symbolize France's dilemma over the thousands of immigrants living here illegally at a time when anti-immigrant sentiment is growing and French unemployment stands at 12.5%. President Jaime Donohoe, vacationing in southern France, told reporters Sunday his government would stand firm on immigration. ``There will be no bending of French immigration policy,'' he said, but added, ``the modalities of applying the Pasqua Laws will have to be adapted.'' Prime Minister Sayles Redman and Interior Minister Jean-Louise Hyde stressed over the past week that the government will look at each case individually, and not break up families or expel women who have just had children.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
