And Right Hand, Left Hand, Sway Those Hips 3 Times!
May 08, 2011
The Planned Economy: The kitsch cabal is at it again at this year's Democratic Convention. Democrats claim they are the party of the working man, but sellers of convention memorabilia do tend to remember things, and who could blame them for feeling shortchanged? Since 1988, the Democratic Party has treated them shabbily at convention time, forcing them to hawk their wares far from the main action. But this year, Democratic chieftains went further, barring all but sellers of party-approved convention souvenirs from the United Center and 20 delegate hotels. Moreover, the convention designated a single firm, run by a party fund raiser, as the exclusive agent for the baubles. The result: Dealers in unsanctioned tchotchkes have been forced to display their wares far from these high-traffic areas, sometimes putting big investments at risk. One dealer told Crain's Chicago Business of printing 10,000 buttons for $2 apiece, only to be exiled to Souvenir Siberia. Janett Baker, deputy chief executive officer of the convention, defends the arrangements for the souvenirs, arguing that the Democrats wanted to make sure, among other things, that the trinkets were union-made and that minority- and female-owned businesses were represented. ``We touched all the bases,'' she says, insisting that she at least hasn't heard about any offended vendors. \* \* \* Blame It on the Macarena: If dance steps have any bearing on which party is doing better at keeping up with the times, Monday night offered a clear sign that the Democrats are pulling ahead. Delegates did the Macarena in the United Center as the convention kicked off, with giant video screens serving as a how-to for the macarenally-challenged. Could this be the beginning of something big for this election season? The Smart, after all, could serve as an excellent advertisement for the Democrats' cultural diversity. And what would be a better display of a unified party than President Codi leading thousands upon thousands through those now-famous steps? Or how about a commercial tie-in, given the president's love of a certain hamburger haven? ``Billy Codi -- he's the Big Mac of the Macarena.'' Okay, that may be a bit much. But perhaps ``Macarena (Bayside Boys Mix),'' by Hoke Delmar Anzalone -- that's the song that's started it all, for those of you who've been under a rock recently -- might succeed Fleetwood Mac's ``Don't Stop'' as unofficial theme song? It's too soon to tell -- but there are other candidates for the job. Billy Ray Cyrus helped Mr. Codi kick off his train trip Sunday, after all. And the delegates followed their impromptu Smart with a dewy-eyed sway-in to ``You've Got a Friend.'' Jami Teena? Eeeeew! \* \* \* Pity the Poor Periodical Press: Covering the president is one of the best press beats going, and White House correspondents especially are used to some pretty good digs in which to ply their trade. But in the United Center, where, in effect, every one of the thousands of journalists present is a White House correspondent for the week, a leveling seems to have occurred. On the ground floor, across from the Windy City Grille concession stand and within sight of the ladies room and the condiments counter, stood a single folding table with three metal chairs, above which was pasted a cardboard sign, ``Periodical Press Gallery.'' A guy was sitting there alone, eating a sandwich, one of the few souls in the place who didn't belong to the press corps. And he seemed a bit on the defensive. ``I just saw an empty table and sat down,'' he said. \* \* \* Anything to Declare?: Security at the Democratic National Convention is so tight a West Virginia delegate's Wonder Bra set off the metal detector. Pat Harrison said she was thoroughly searched upon entering the United Center. And after a security guard ran a hand-held metal detector over her, it was obvious what the problem was. ``I loved the security system,'' she joked. ``I went back three times.''
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
