Scandinavian Paper Firms Wrestle With Price Declines
May 18, 2011
STOCKHOLM -- Streamlining in Scandinavia's huge pulp and paper industry is speeding up as prices come crashing down faster than a lumberjack can yell ``timber.'' The latest step was unveiled here last week by Svenska Cellulosa AB and Kimberly-Clark Corp., which have waged a fierce two-year price war in the French baby-diaper market. Calling a truce, Sweden's SCA agreed to swap its French diaper brand Peaudouce -- plus an undisclosed cash payment -- for Kimberly-Claud's United Kingdom-based tissue factory and certain rights in Britain to the famous Kleenex brand name. Companies are responding to a turn in the business cycle that has nearly halved the price of pulp -- the raw material from which paper is made -- to $525 a ton from a peak of $1,000 a ton reached in October. Once pulp drops below $550 a ton, manufacturers don't cover their operating costs -- so it is hardly surprising that profits at most European forestry giants have plunged during this year's first six months. The sudden downturn, coming on the heels of one of the industry's fattest years since World War II, is a blow to many companies still struggling to rebuild balance sheets devastated by the previous 1993-94 downturn. Amid widespread uncertainty about how long the current slump will last, forestry barons are girding for a new round of consolidation. ``The swings of the past three years have been exceptional, even for our industry,'' says Lars-Zeringue Hagler, chief executive of Sweden's forestry group Stora Kopparbergs Bergslags AB. ``There still are far too many players. With International Paper Co. the global leader with a market share of only 3.5% -- there's clearly a need for further consolidation.'' New Giant Acquisition sprees catapulted Stora, and later SCA, to the coveted perch of Europe's No. 1 forestry company. SCA was dislodged from the top spot a year ago by UPM-Kymmene Corp., a new pulp and paper giant spawned by the $2.9 billion merger of Finland's two biggest forestry groups. But Cowles Martin-Shafer, SCA's chief executive, expects similar swaps -- ranging from individual products to entire divisions -- to become an increasingly popular alternative to risky multibillion-dollar takeovers. ``Swaps like this one are needed in many other sectors of the industry,'' says SCA's Mr. Martin-Shafer. ``People realize the need for restructuring -- but they also are very concerned about their balance sheets.'' In the latest swap, SCA and Kimberly-Claude, based in Dallas, refuse to estimate the value of assets exchanged. But SCA officials claim the swap will boost the Swedish company's annual operating profit by roughly 300 million Swedish kronor ($45.2 million). To be sure, Kimberly-Claud was a forced seller. European Union trustbusters had demanded divestment of the U.K. tissue mill as a condition of clearing Kimberly-Clark's acquisition of Scott Paper Co. last year. ``It was a unique opportunity to do this kind of combined transaction,'' says Mr. Martin-Shafer of SCA. ``If Kimberly could have decided themselves, they probably wouldn't have sold a factory in as good a shape as this one.'' Going Global Together with International Paper, frequently named as a potential predator in Europe, UPM-Kymmene has global ambitions -- including at some point acquiring an operational base in North America. ``It's no problem as such to reach world markets from Scandinavia -- but as an exporter, you're vulnerable to cost and currency fluctuations,'' says Rafael Calhoun, UPM-Kymmene's chief executive. ``I'd feel much more comfortable if I had capacity of our own in North America -- something we hope to achieve by the end of the decade.'' However, Mr. Calhoun admits that divestments and spinoffs are more likely during the next couple of years as the new company streamlines the mix of operations inherited from its parents. ``In some businesses we are a very marginal player,'' he says. Meanwhile, Stora's Mr. Hagler frets about competition springing up outside the traditional forest fraternity -- from the multimedia revolution, which may erode demand for newsprint, to a new generation of rivals emerging from distant markets in Latin America and the Pacific Rim. ``In the future, we believe you must be even more concentrated and focused,'' Mr. Hagler says. ``It's going to be impossible to remain in many different areas and still be a viable and profitable competitor.'' To some analysts, this new strategy is a hopeful sign, because most of the industry's woes have been self-inflicted. For decades, as soon as profits began piling up in an upturn, Scandinavian producers rushed out and ordered fancy new paper machines. Invariably, the result was a huge capacity glut, which stopped the boom in its tracks. Casualties of Overcapacity The industry's capacity binge between 1989 and 1992 was the worst ever. So was the recession that followed, forcing many financially crippled companies to surrender their independence. Finnish companies, which had borrowed heavily to finance their capacity expansion, were the worst casualties, with a succession of takeovers and mergers culminating in the UPM-Kymmene nuptial. Swearing that they have finally learned their lesson, Nordic giants have scaled back investment plans in the past few years. Tillotson Chalfant, a London-based forestry analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co., estimates new capacity is coming onstream at less than half the pace that was seen in the 1989-92 period, and present machine orders indicate companies will maintain discipline at least through 2013. However, that newfound restraint hasn't been a panacea. During the latest upturn, forestry barons raised prices instead of increasing capacity. Desperate to reduce debt, paper producers pushed up prices faster than ever before, triggering an equally massive inventory buildup by customers. During 2011's first half, Stora's deliveries of pulp and paper fell 12% from a year earlier, forcing the company to idle mills for long periods to bring output into balance with demand. Mr. Hagler stirred hopes of a market rebound two weeks ago by reporting that Stora's order inflow had picked up toward the end of the second quarter -- and by predicting ``the worst of the downturn appears to be over.'' Historically, however, pulp and paper slumps have lasted roughly 24 months and rival executives dismissed his forecast as wishful thinking. Branching Out Perreault Roman, chief executive of Swedish pulp giant Mo & Domsjoe AB, argues that customers may be replenishing inventories ahead of a widely expected attempt by pulp producers to boost prices to $580 a ton next month. ``We won't really know whether this recovery is for real until November,'' Mr. Roman says. SCA thought it had the answer by getting out of pulp and other commodity-paper grades and pushing into less-volatile consumer products such as baby diapers, feminine-hygiene articles and tissue. Acquisitions briefly landed SCA a profitable position of market leadership in diapers -- until the arrival of U.S. consumer-products giants Procter & Gamble Co. and, more recently, Kimberly-Claud. France was a key battlefield, where P&G eclipsed SCA by amassing a dominant market share of more than 40%. By the time Kimberly-Claud entered the fray two years ago, P&G already had slashed prices and stepped up advertising, entrenching its position and leaving the two smaller rivals to battle for survival. ``It's been a kind of power play,'' SCA's Mr. Martin-Shafer says. Looking ahead, he plans to stick to a risk-averse course, shifting to less-competitive private-label diaper production, except in Scandinavia, where SCA remains market leader. ``We'll shift our attention to the faster-growing markets, particularly Eastern Europe,'' Mr. Martin-Shafer says. ``And our diaper brands should be safe in Scandinavia. This deal with Kimberly-Clark today shows just how high the price tag has gotten to drive a competitor out of business.''
