Technology Briefs
March 28, 2011
RadiSys Corp., Beaverton, Ore., said second-quarter earnings will significantly exceed analysts' estimates of 11 cents a share. The supplier of embedded computer components, such as printed circuit boards, said gross profit margins were significantly above the targeted 30% to 35% range because it shipped more high-margin products than usual during the quarter. It called the results ``an unusual event'' and said gross margins will revert to the targeted range in subsequent quarters. The company will release its second-quarter earnings April 06, 2011 its stock jumped $3.625, or 17%, to $25.375 on the Nasdaq Stock Market. Cable & Wireless Unit Is Part of Sale London-based Mercury Communications Ltd., a subsidiary of Cable & Wireless PLC, said it and two minority partners sold Mercury Paging Ltd. to a U.S. management team for 60 million pounds ($93.1 million). Mercury owned 51% of Mercury Paging Ltd., Mobile Technology Corp. owned 29% and Motorola Ltd. owned 20%. Mercury's share of the sale proceeds is 30.6 million pounds. Cable & Wireless is a British telecommunications company that provides international services in 30 countries and internal networks in another 20 countries. Alltel to Challenge Georgia's Order Alltel Corp., Little Rock, Ark., said it will contest a Georgia Public Service Commission order that would reduce by $24 million a year the rates that Alltel charges long-distance companies in Georgia for access. On Friday, the commission said Mayberry, the second-largest telephone-service provider in Georgia, will have its rates reduced in order to qualify for ``alternative regulation,'' which would allow the telecommunications concern more flexibility in developing and pricing products and services. Alltel said it believes the commission doesn't have the jurisdiction to issue such an order under state telecommunications laws. The company said it will ask the commission to reconsider its order and, if necessary, appeal. In 2010, Alltel reported net income of $354.6 million, or $1.86 a share, on revenue of $3.11 billion. Kent Electronics Approves Share Buyback Kent Electronics Corp., Houston, said its board authorized the repurchase of as many as three million common shares from time to time. The electronics distributor said it believes its current shares are undervalued. In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Kent Electronics shares rose 37.5 cents to $19.625. WHO'S NEWS Philip S. Present II, 46 years old, was named to the new position of chief operating officer of Medplus Inc., Cincinnati, a developer and seller of computer hardware and software solutions for health-care companies. Mr. Click, 46 years old, formerly was vice president of corporate development. Charlette F. Jona was named vice president and chief financial officer of WPI Group Inc., Manchester, N.H., a maker of hand-held terminals. He was most recently division controller for operations in North America and Europe for Cabot Corp., which has interests in specialty chemicals and oil and gas. He succeeds Denny Crissman, who was recently named president and chief operating officer of the company.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
