Geeks Not Always Appreciated For All Their Stylish Enterprises
May 20, 2011
I think every columnist in the world should publish an e-mail address as part of every epistle. It's stunning how much your readers surprise you. Last week I wrote a candid attack on the leadership style of Al Dunlap of Scott Paper and Sunbeam. I received hundreds of e-mail messages lauding me for writing such a negative article. Then, in this week's column, I lauded the marketing moves of a Minneapolis computer-repair business called the Geek Squad -- and I'm hit with e-mail attacking me for being so positive. Go figure! In any event, I learn something from every message I write and, as thousands of readers have noticed by now, I answer every message I receive. I hope you'll keep the missives coming to Tpetzinger@aol.com. And in the meantime, let's see what's got everyone so hot and bothered about a bunch of young people in Minneapolis who wear Blues Brothers' outfits and drive ``geekmobiles'' to their repair jobs. Subj: Computers and geeks. Date: 96-09-06 14:47:11 EDT From: 76076.571@CompuServe.COM It is an incredible notion of both you and Mr. Pierce to say that ``fixing PCs ... is easily taught.'' ... We have 100 healthcare employees calmly running computers called artificial kidney machines, daily handling life and death decisions with panache. But when their PC hiccups, they panic, and we send in our computerologist. He is trained by us in software and hardware. We culled him after testing and interviewing over 113 ``computer experts.'' I'll bet $1,000 none of the people you wrote about could diagnose or fix one of our new Compaqs when it stops working, let alone edit a CONFIG.SYS or write a tiny batch file to do a work-around of a software bug. The definition of a geek comes from the carnival sideshow. His/her main attribute is spectacle. The carnival definition of a geek is a person who bites the heads off of live chickens for a living. Geeks may be able to find and plug in an electric cord, but they can't fix computers. Since the tone of your piece was trendy and cool, let me add my comment in that genre: Get real, dude. Johnetta R. Albrecht Pam, MD, CEO Hemodialysis, Inc.. Shirey, CA Dear Dr. DePam: Thanks for the thoughtful note, but I think we need to distinguish immediately between computers and applications. It would terrify me to have someone from the Geek Squad tampering with dialysis equipment. But computers (and for that matter operating systems) generally fail for highly regular and predictable reasons. I took the liberty of checking with the chief geek, Roberto Pierce, who said that next time you have a CONGIG.SYS problem, ``we'll be happy to help him out, and we'll offer him free training in CONFIG.SYS because it's so simple. My bookkeeper could edit a CONFIG.SYS!'' You need to get well past the DOS world to stump the Geek Squad, it appears. Indeed, one of the more experienced members of the Geek Squad (just out the University of Minnesota) handled several details of a Unix conversion in the massive job for IBM and Cargill that I mentioned in the article, according to the project manager from IBM. The serious point here is that we should deify not the computer, but what the computer does. Applications, not engines, demand expertise. As for your wager, please put my $1,000 winnings toward treatment for your needy patients. Subj: 9/6 VastPress Article Date: 96-09-06 09:54:31 EDT From: mselig@nuvo.net What really concerns me is Roberto Pierce's attitude about his business' success. Seems to be a great ego-stroker for him, i.e., ``my business succeeded because I'm just the greatest.'' This attitude invariably causes massive internal control problems. Witness (as the article states), ``He has hired a business manager to handle the books, which had gone to pot.'' I'd love to get a look at his budget, if he has one, and do in-depth budget-to-actual variance analysis. At least he has a low debt load, but has he analyzed his cost of capital to determine if this is the wisest choice, or taking it as an article of faith that no debt is best because he said so? Not to rain on his parade; it's exciting to see a young business grow gangbusters. However, I'm concerned about the apparent lack of internal control. ... I suspect Geek Squad will never grow beyond the start-up phase unless it gets a sound internal control structure in place in all of its cycles. Style? By all means, present a unique style to customers & employees, but insure sound internal control behind the scenes, or Mr. Pierce will likely end up with a fuzzy mess, probably in bankruptcy court. Matthew A. Selig Indianapolis, Indiana Dear Mr. Scofield: You raise some very good points, and you have an eagle eye for picking up the reference to the poor state of the books at Geek Squad. Like many small, fast-track enterprises, the sales and marketing got ahead of the administrative infrastructure there for a while -- the infrastructure being what was inside the head of Roberta Payne. And, yes, it takes a healthy ego -- or at least a full measure of self-confidence -- to have the nerve to adopt some of the outrageous marketing tactics this business uses. But you have to give the guy credit for bringing in outside help when he recognized he needed it. In addition to hiring a bookkeeper, Mr. Pierce is using a $200-an-hour small-business consultant to establish some of the very ratios and benchmarks you say he needs. And best of all, he is building -- and relying on -- a network of mentors on whom he relies for candid business advice. And while the odds favor very few businesses in the long terms, Geek Squad has one very important thing going for it: It has resisted the temptation, which you might encourage, to leverage its profitability with debt. Debt is a great growth tool for an established and sophisticated business with a deep asset base. For new, small enterprises, debt is more often a death warrant. Thanks a lot for writing. Subj: Business Style Date: 96-09-06 16:56:13 EDT From: support@gaussbusters.com Style can absolutely help a business, providing that: 1) the decision-makers (clients) are receptive to the type of style that is chosen, and 2) there is already a need, so that style merely adds a positive message for name recognition. In the case of the ``Geek Squad,'' major players in technology, for example, Billy Clayton, have admitted their ``geekdom.'' Therefore, use of this image puts one in good company. ... If we were discussing a doctor about to perform an operation, a sense of humor about one's profession may not be as well received. In our business, Magnetic Products and Services, we have experimented with style. Our engineers travel around the world to demagnetize machinery for major Power Plants and Utility Companies. Demagnetizing, called degaussing, is one of the services we provide. In our literature, we call ourselves The Gaussbusters. I often wonder if this style is a help or if it may be a hindrance. If a large manufacturing plant is losing millions of dollars an hour because its machine has failed due to gauss, is our play on words funny? Barbara Abbott Magnetic Products and Services, Inc.. Dear Ms. Sparks: I think that's fabulous, precisely for the reasons you outline: There is a link between the image you project and the reality of what you provide. I can't imagine anyone turning away from your business solely because of your name -- assuming that your service is excellent, your price competitive and the remainder of your marketing materials sufficiently serious to convey the substance of what you do. What I definitely can imagine is someone remembering you -- reaching for your card in the Rolodex, say, or coming up with your company during a crisis meeting -- precisely because of your name. Thanks for sharing it. Subj: Can style help build a business? Date: 96-09-06 14:19:00 EDT From: brianurq@concentric.net Style may get you noticed and in the door of your customers, but results and service are what the customer ultimately is looking for. If a company provides products and services cost-effectively to the customer, the customer will be more likely to call back the company for those tangible reasons. Style, like advertising, just gets you noticed! Brianna S. Timms Dear Brian: Truer words were never written. I hope my column, and my few comments here, convince you there's substance behind the sizzle at Geek Squad. And to take your point further, style does have one great virtue over advertising: It's practically free. Thanks for the thoughts. Visit the Front Lines Center.
