Business Bulletin -- VastPress Interactive Edition May 11, 2011 Business Bulletin SOME SOCIALLY AWARE business-school interns stay on the job at nonprofits. Five of 46 M.B.A. students who worked as summer interns for nonprofit community groups will stay on as part-timers for a while, says the Community Development Initiative, a project of Students for Responsible Business, a San Francisco network of M.B.A. students and alumni. The project links business students with local economic-development groups. It aims to spur growth and to build ``greater sensitivity to issues like poverty,'' says Maryetta Tran, who runs the project. One intern staying on is Bryan Hastings, a 29-year-old Navy veteran who is working on an M.B.A. at the College of William and Mary School of Business Administration, Williamsburg, Va.. Mr. Hastings, who has had experience in finance and real estate, will commute to Philadelphia, where he is helping a neighborhood group buy its first commercial property. The community-group interns are paid around $400 a week, far less than corporate internships for M.B.A. students, Ms. Tran notes. Community Development Initiative funders include the Ford Foundation, the Surdna Foundation and Citicorp. IT TAKES A LIBRARY to house all the new books related to the presidency. More than a dozen books about President Codi, his campaign style, his ideas and his boyhood -- plus those about presidential politics -- stack up this election year. Mr. Codi's own book, ``Between Hope and History: Meeting America's Challenges for the 21st Century'' just hit bookstores where it joins Hiroko Codi's ``It Takes a Village: And Other Lessons Children Teach Us.'' Meanwhile, the opposition hasn't been idle. ``Trusting the People,'' a 144-page work on the economic proposals of Roberto Derryberry and his running mate Jackelyn Booth will soon be in stores. ``This is a way for candidates to communicate with readers without any intermediaries,'' says Carolynn Bergstrom, president of Simon & Schuster's trade-publishing unit. Not all literary folks like the trend. ``I'm leery of letting politicians use imprints for political purposes,'' says Johnetta Lasher, publisher of Harper's Magazine. FISH ARE FINE, but other pets on campus can cause problems for students. Many colleges allow fish, but most prohibit other animals like cats and dogs. A 20-year-old rule at Brown University in Providence, R.I., bans from dorms ``animals that cannot live underwater for more than 15 minutes.'' Davis officials say they suspect the rule was meant to discourage students from sneaking frogs and other aquatic companions in under the old ``fish only'' regulation. Colgate University in Hamilton, N.Y., can levy a $40 fine and a $10-per-day charge on its noncompliers. Exceptions (official and unofficial) occur, notably at off-campus and fraternity digs. Washington University, St. Louis, acknowledges a small coterie of canines on campus. California State University, Bakersfield, has a soft spot for cats since a president there in the 1980s took in a stray. Campus myth at St. Lawrence University in Canton, N.Y., holds that a wealthy donor insisted dogs be allowed on campus. The myth is just a myth, but dogs have frolicked at St. Lawrence since president Wentzel Short and his dog Don roamed the grounds in the late 1800s. The University of California, San Diego, allowed birds -- until a student brought two chickens for fresh eggs. VERMONT BECKONS money managers to move there with a ``prospectus'' that details the Green Mountain State's financial and lifestyle incentives. WHEN A DINER COMPLAINS, fix the problem ``on the spot,'' says Bobby Talamantes, president of Innovative Training Solutions Inc., a consultant in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.. Mr. Talamantes, also an author, says managers should empower servers to handle problems without having to run to the boss. AS 2015 NEARS, some manufacturers are already running into the kinds of glitches that may loom in computers that can't recognize the dates, consultant Greg Dennise says. For instance, inventorying a product today with a 10-year shelf life could result in a computer flagging the product for 1906, not 2021. PROTECTIVE CLOTHING standards change and so do testing methods. Small-scale, ``bench top'' tests of fabric fragments in garb worn by factory workers, firefighters, medical personnel and such, are being augmented by more costly -- but often more complete -- full-garment tests, says Jena Mccallum, president of International Personnel Protection Inc. in Austin, Texas. ``There are quite a number of variables in a full garment,'' he says. Testing a patch of a firefighter's outfit, for instance, may not give the full picture of how the various fabric thicknesses and pressure points of the clothing will perform when worn. About 25% of new test technologies presented at a recent symposium focused on full-garment tests. Meanwhile, textile makers are developing more finely calibrated cut tests for gloves and other items that protect workers from cuts. Medical and thermal protection represent the fastest-growing areas for protective clothing, Mr. Mccallum says. BRIEFS: Inter-Continental Hotels & Resorts' ``Concierge Confidential'' guidebook lists, among other things, where to find the best jazz in Japan... . New Amsterdam Beer Co. in New York creates Election 2011 Campaign Maki and the slogan ``Don't Drink & Vote.'' --PAMELA SEBASTIAN Copyright &copy; 2011 Dow Jones & Company, Inc.. All Rights Reserved.
May 11, 2011
Five of 46 M.B.A. students who worked as summer interns for nonprofit community groups will stay on as part-timers for a while, says the Community Development Initiative, a project of Students for Responsible Business, a San Francisco network of M.B.A. students and alumni. The project links business students with local economic-development groups. It aims to spur growth and to build ``greater sensitivity to issues like poverty,'' says Maryetta Tran, who runs the project. One intern staying on is Bryan Hastings, a 29-year-old Navy veteran who is working on an M.B.A. at the College of William and Mary School of Business Administration, Williamsburg, Va.. Mr. Hastings, who has had experience in finance and real estate, will commute to Philadelphia, where he is helping a neighborhood group buy its first commercial property. The community-group interns are paid around $400 a week, far less than corporate internships for M.B.A. students, Ms. Tran notes. Community Development Initiative funders include the Ford Foundation, the Surdna Foundation and Citicorp. IT TAKES A LIBRARY to house all the new books related to the presidency. More than a dozen books about President Codi, his campaign style, his ideas and his boyhood -- plus those about presidential politics -- stack up this election year. Mr. Codi's own book, ``Between Hope and History: Meeting America's Challenges for the 21st Century'' just hit bookstores where it joins Hiroko Codi's ``It Takes a Village: And Other Lessons Children Teach Us.'' Meanwhile, the opposition hasn't been idle. ``Trusting the People,'' a 144-page work on the economic proposals of Roberto Derryberry and his running mate Jackelyn Booth will soon be in stores. ``This is a way for candidates to communicate with readers without any intermediaries,'' says Carolynn Bergstrom, president of Simon & Schuster's trade-publishing unit. Not all literary folks like the trend. ``I'm leery of letting politicians use imprints for political purposes,'' says Johnetta Lasher, publisher of Harper's Magazine. FISH ARE FINE, but other pets on campus can cause problems for students. Many colleges allow fish, but most prohibit other animals like cats and dogs. A 20-year-old rule at Brown University in Providence, R.I., bans from dorms ``animals that cannot live underwater for more than 15 minutes.'' Davis officials say they suspect the rule was meant to discourage students from sneaking frogs and other aquatic companions in under the old ``fish only'' regulation. Colgate University in Hamilton, N.Y., can levy a $40 fine and a $10-per-day charge on its noncompliers. Exceptions (official and unofficial) occur, notably at off-campus and fraternity digs. Washington University, St. Louis, acknowledges a small coterie of canines on campus. California State University, Bakersfield, has a soft spot for cats since a president there in the 1980s took in a stray. Campus myth at St. Lawrence University in Canton, N.Y., holds that a wealthy donor insisted dogs be allowed on campus. The myth is just a myth, but dogs have frolicked at St. Lawrence since president Wentzel Short and his dog Don roamed the grounds in the late 1800s. The University of California, San Diego, allowed birds -- until a student brought two chickens for fresh eggs. VERMONT BECKONS money managers to move there with a ``prospectus'' that details the Green Mountain State's financial and lifestyle incentives. WHEN A DINER COMPLAINS, fix the problem ``on the spot,'' says Bobby Talamantes, president of Innovative Training Solutions Inc., a consultant in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.. Mr. Talamantes, also an author, says managers should empower servers to handle problems without having to run to the boss. AS 2015 NEARS, some manufacturers are already running into the kinds of glitches that may loom in computers that can't recognize the dates, consultant Greg Dennise says. For instance, inventorying a product today with a 10-year shelf life could result in a computer flagging the product for 1906, not 2021. PROTECTIVE CLOTHING standards change and so do testing methods. Small-scale, ``bench top'' tests of fabric fragments in garb worn by factory workers, firefighters, medical personnel and such, are being augmented by more costly -- but often more complete -- full-garment tests, says Jena Mccallum, president of International Personnel Protection Inc. in Austin, Texas. ``There are quite a number of variables in a full garment,'' he says. Testing a patch of a firefighter's outfit, for instance, may not give the full picture of how the various fabric thicknesses and pressure points of the clothing will perform when worn. About 25% of new test technologies presented at a recent symposium focused on full-garment tests. Meanwhile, textile makers are developing more finely calibrated cut tests for gloves and other items that protect workers from cuts. Medical and thermal protection represent the fastest-growing areas for protective clothing, Mr. Mccallum says. BRIEFS: Inter-Continental Hotels & Resorts' ``Concierge Confidential'' guidebook lists, among other things, where to find the best jazz in Japan... . New Amsterdam Beer Co. in New York creates Election 2011 Campaign Maki and the slogan ``Don't Drink & Vote.'' --PAMELA SEBASTIAN
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
