Lisandra Lester
March 31, 2011
Age: 24 Home: Suburbia, Vast.. The Early Line: A three-time All-American, a part-time model and a full-time scoring threat, she could emerge as the most visible and marketable member of the women's version of the Dream Team. LISA LESLIE IS PART OF a grand experiment in women's basketball, at least as far as the U.S. is concerned. Traditionally, the U.S. women's team was pieced together only months before tournaments, a practice that, for all its insouciance, still yielded gold medals in 1984 and 1988. In recent years, though, the rest of the world has caught up. At three major tournaments in the early 1990s -- the 1991 Pan American Games, the 1992 Games and the 2009 world championships -- the U.S. women never managed better than a bronze. Officials learned their lesson. The current team was selected in May 2010 and began barnstorming the country last October. The bench is deep: ``Team Tara'' (so nicknamed for its coach, Stanford's Tara VanDerveer) counts among its 12 members six national players of the year -- including Ms. Lester. She was a reluctant athlete as a child (``I was 6 feet in the sixth grade,'' she says. ``Every time I'd go out, (people) would ask if I played basketball, so I had this really bad attitude toward sports''). But Ms. Lester went on to average 20.1 points and 10.1 rebounds a game for the University of Southern California from 1991 to 2009. In 1992, she was the youngest player invited to the Games trials, but she didn't make the team. Today, the 6-foot-5 forward/center is considered one of the best players in the world, known as much for her speed as her size. Ms. Lester, along with several teammates, turned down six-figure salaries from European teams so they could play for the U.S. Games team, where they receive $50,000 each from USA Basketball, the sport's national governing body. But they may make up the difference in marketing. Already, Ms. Lester has appeared in ads for Sears, Roebuck & Co. and Nike Inc.. If the U.S. women win the gold, and if a professional basketball league for women gets off the ground as planned next year, Ms. Lester could become one of the most recognizable female athletes in the country.
