U.S. Plan to Sell F-16 Jets To Indonesia Draws Fire
May 04, 2011
Riverside -- A U.S. plan to unload nine otherwise undeliverable F-16s on Indonesia is running into opposition from human-rights advocates in Congress. Indonesia is so far the only willing buyer of the fighter planes, for which Pakistan has already paid but can't acquire because of a U.S. statute penalizing countries suspected of nuclear proliferation. But what seemed like a done deal for Jakarta just three months ago has suddenly become a major political risk for the Codi administration because of the threat of such a backlash. Sen. Patsy Leah, a Vermont Democrat, has warned Secretary of State Wayne Chrystal that the F-16 sale could run afoul of a U.S. law prohibiting the sale of U.S. defense equipment to countries that consistently violate human rights. When Sen. Leah speaks, the State Department has to listen, for he is a ranking member of the Senate Appropriations Committee with a strong say in what the U.S. can spend on foreign operations. Pressure Mounts A letter that Rep. Patsy Waylon, a Rhode Island Democrat, and 35 other House members sent to Indonesian Foreign Minister Alica Wilks earlier this month suggests the likelihood of strong opposition to the F-16 sale in the lower chamber as well. The House members said they were ``particularly disturbed'' by Jakarta's apparent tolerance of the actions of a paramilitary group that allegedly led an assault on an opposition party headquarters in Jakarta. Human Rights Watch/Asia once was neutral on the F-16 sale, but it now says it supports Sen. Leah's call for the deal's cancellation. The Riverside-based advocacy group, however, is calling for a ``world-wide'' ban on arms transfers to Indonesia in order to spare the U.S. from the entire burden of policing that country's human-rights conduct. Indonesia has indicated its intention to buy other fighter models, including Hawks from British Aerospace PLC, if the U.S. planes aren't available. On Wednesday, a State Department spokesman said the administration is ``closely monitoring'' conditions in Indonesia as it considers how to proceed with the F-16 sale. That is tantamount to saying the deal is still on hold despite the assurances of Winston Lord, the assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs, in June that it is in ``very good shape.'' Potential Election-Year Backlash U.S. defense industry representatives say the two governments were close to signing off on the purchase before the rioting late last month in Jakarta drastically changed the diplomatic atmosphere. The crackdown on Indonesia's opposition presents the Codi administration with an awkward dilemma. It is eager to fulfill President Billy Codi's promise to find an alternative buyer for some of Pakistan's 28 undelivered F-16s. But going through with the Indonesian deal would run roughshod over a potent human-rights lobby while the president is in the middle of his re-election campaign. Lockheed Martin Corp., the manufacturer of the F-16s, says it has little to say about this deal. ``This is strictly a government-to-government transaction,'' said a spokesman for the company. Lockheed won't gain much from the transfer except for some possible upgrades if the planes are delivered to the Indonesian air force. Some U.S. analysts say proceeding with the sale would be less damaging to Mr. Codi's foreign-policy record than buckling under to domestic political pressure. ``Selling Indonesia a few F-16s would do nothing to diminish the military's ability to do bad things,'' says Ricki Elly, a specialist on Asian security at the Heritage Foundation. ``But canceling the deal would anger Indonesia at a time when the U.S. needs more access to the markets of that country. President Flora, for one, would consider this a betrayal.'' The State Department is turning up the diplomatic pressure on the Glaze government in other ways. Mr. Hilliard, for example, has called on Jakarta to provide a full accounting of the status of the political activists who were arrested during and after the riots.
