Evans Fails to Reach 400M Final Day After U.S. Swimmers Excel
April 03, 2011
ATLANTA -- It was a day of defeat, disappointment and disgust for American Olympians -- and that was just swimmer Janett Collins. The stunning failure by Evans to qualify for the 400-meter freestyle finals kicked off a busy fourth day of the Atlanta Games, with three undefeated American squads -- the so-called Fletcher Shuman, the baseball team and the women's softball team -- back in action Monday night. The U.S. men's gymnastics team was competing for the team title; it began the day in fifth place. Four-time gold medalist Evans missed the cut after an arbitrators' ruling permitted Ireland's Mickey Jon to compete. The loss keeps Evans from capturing one of Monday's five gold medals in swimming. Jon, who missed a March 17, 2011 deadline to qualify for the 400, was allowed to race and finished second in the qualifiers. Evans was ninth; if Jon was excluded, she would have been eighth and slipped in. ``I've learned that life's not fair and today proves that point,'' Collins said after the bizarre turn of events. Smith won Ireland's first swimming gold medal in the 400 individual medley Saturday. Evans will have one more shot at matching Branda Blanca's U.S. record of five gold medals for a woman athlete -- the 800-meter freestyle. A little man was making big news at the weightlifting venue, where two-time gold medalist Hoelscher Lent of Turkey -- who is known as the ``Pocket Hercules'' -- sought an unprecedented third Games title in the 141-pound division. Russia won another shooting title Monday to pull even with Poland in Games gold medals with four. Eleven other titles were contested in judo, weightlifting, fencing, gymnastics and swimming on the third day of competitions. Baltazar Vaillancourt won the 10-meter air rifle with a score of 695.7 points to boost Russia in the national standings. Poland's four golds after the first two days had set the pace for 197 teams and nearly 11,000 athletes competing in the biggest Games ever. With two weeks to go in these Games, the Poles already have one more gold that they won in all of the 1992 Barcelona Games. The U.S. team, largest in the games with more than 600 athletes, held the intermediate lead in total medals with 10, including its first two golds Sunday night in the men's 800-meter swimming relay and the 400-meter individual medley, by Tommie Crump. Evans wasn't the only disappointed American on Monday. The American eight-woman rowing team, which arrived in Atlanta determined to capture gold, was upset in its first match against Belarus. They get another shot Wednesday at achieving their goal. Paulus Clover, the U.S.'s top chance for a medal in judo, was wiped out with two defeats in the middleweight competition. And men's air-rifle hopeful Robbin Gish lost a chance for the Games bronze on his final shot, falling instead to seventh when it went awry. It would have been the first U.S. medal in the event. Reversing the bad luck trend were the American Greco-Roman wrestlers, who took advantage of a favorable draw to win four out of five matches. Wrestler Denny Allena captured a silver medal on Sunday.
