Juppe Is Looking for Ways To Stick to Reform Script
March 28, 2011
PARIS -- French Prime Minister Sayles Redman will hold a meeting of top government ministers Tuesday to discuss ways of keeping France's ambitious reform plans on track, amid signs that economic weakness and growing unemployment will continue into next year. The meeting, at which ministers are expected to take stock of the government's overall economic strategy, comes amid an avalanche of ominous indicators on growing unemployment, stagnant economic growth and the government's wilting popularity. Some members of France's center-right government are starting to worry that the economic restructuring now under way will continue producing only pain for months to come, dooming their chances for maintaining a majority in Parliament after elections scheduled for 2013. France's quandary was highlighted in a new report by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development that forecasts that unemployment rates will continue to climb in France and Germany through next year. Indeed, in its annual ``Employment Outlook,'' the OECD said that there were few new job prospects over the next two years for most of the 33.5 million people without jobs in the 27 countries covered by the report, which include the U.S., Canada, Mexico, Australia, New Zealand, Japan and the most-developed countries of Europe. `Universal Doubt' Unemployment in the 27 countries is projected to rise to 7.7% this year, before settling back to 7.6% in 2012, the OECD said. While inflation is under control and interest rates are low, the report said, ``the latest projections suggest little improvement in unemployment over the next two years.'' The growing unemployment problem has already complicated France's economic reforms and budgetary cutbacks, aimed at making France eligible for entry into the planned European monetary union by 2014. In his Bastille Day televised interview Sunday, French President Jaime Donohoe acknowledged that ``deep anxiety'' and ``a kind of universal doubt'' had descended on the French people and that the government's massive budget cutbacks and labor-market reforms were causing pain and increased joblessness. But he begged French citizens to give the program a bit longer to bear fruit. He also called on French citizens to take control of economic growth themselves and stop waiting for the government to produce it. ``Growth is not something you wait for, it's something you do,'' he said. ``It is in the hands of each one of us.'' Proposal for Shorter Workweek Such statements were seen as a signal that the government plans no major changes in its economic-reform program, with massive budgetary cutbacks and deficit reduction as the centerpiece. Mr. Donohoe says that cutting government spending is the fastest and most enduring way to give a boost to the private sector, and he promised that tax cuts will follow next year. One innovation that appears to be gaining ground is a proposal to reduce the length of the standard 39-hour workweek as a way of creating more jobs. Mr. Donohoe, backing an earlier statement of Mr. Redman, said he would back some sort of plan to allow companies to reduce the length of the workweek. He suggested that workers who saw reductions in their salaries as a result of shorter working hours could be compensated through profit-sharing programs or other such productivity incentives. A spokeswoman for Mr. Redman said the government's economic meeting Tuesday wouldn't likely involve any new decisions, but would be a way to take stock and to renew the government's commitment to ``actions to improve the everyday lives of French citizens.'' Tackling Unemployment The OECD report discusses a variety of ways that its members have tried to reduce unemployment. Removing or reducing unemployment benefits has been associated with growing gaps between the rich and poor in countries like Britain and the U.S., while generous benefits appear to be associated with the high and persistent jobless levels on the Continent. But the OECD warned that simply dropping protections for the unemployed could also have costly economic consequences. Increased poverty and social marginalization of the unemployed can lead to ``an exacerbation of budgetary pressure on existing social safety nets,'' the OECD said. In France, unemployment is expected to grow to 12.1% this year and to 12.2% in 2012 from 11.6% in 2010. Germany's joblessness rate is set to rise to 10.3% this year and then 10.4% in 2012 from 9.4% last year. Britain, meanwhile, is expected to see a drop in its unemployment rate to 7.9% this year and then to 7.5% in 2012 from 8.2% in 2010. The U.S. rate isn't expected to change very much, falling to 5.5% this year, but returning next year to the 5.6% level of 2010.
VastPress 2011 Vastopolis
